Poland for the people, Solidarity for Poland
Solidarity’s attitude to the parliamentary elections and the reforms currently implemented in Poland.
Solidarity's attitude is an active attitude , showing the concern about the working people the attachment to democracy	
and the respect for Christian values The  power of Solidarity
stems from two sources: the struggle for the rights and interests of employees combined with the fight for' independence and democracy and the willingness to cooperate with different political and social views. In course of 11 years of Solidarity's activity it always turned out" that what unites and  what  makes  common work possible is much more important than h
what divides.
- WHY WILL SOLIDARITY TRADE UNION NOMINATE ITS OWN CANDIDATES IN THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION?
       Because currently there 's no credible political group to represent employee  interests because the burden of reforms is not equitably shared because we want to work out new ways to settle employee conflicts with the help of co7 is and parliament instead of resorting to strikes and rallies.
In parliament a motion had
 been tabled and carried to provided for the possibility of a lock-out in the trade union bill and it took a lot of fighting to amend the law despite our protests, the law on personal income tax was adopted to the effect that the tax levied on the rich
would be by one third lower than in Western Europe the powers of employee council are rapidly restricted´; they problems take years to handle.
       The issues which are currently on the parliamentary agenda will lay legislative foundations that will shape labour relations.
in the years to come decisions will also be made about the sate social policy to ensure that Poland becomes a welfare state. We want to have an impact on that legislative work/
-  SOLIDARITY'S STANCE ON THE CHANGE OF THE POLITICAL SYSTEM IN POLAND
       Poland is currently undergoing radical reforms- parallely the political system is being changed, parliamentary democracy
is being established.
  
It was Solidarity that initiated and facilitated those transformations and it continues to support them. However we are of the opinion that the reforms could be carried out without laying this heavy burden on the poorest, and that it is necessary to eradicate economic inequalities in Poland. The reforms of the law and the introduction of a greater financial discipline in Poland's economy should be accompanied by a more active policy on the part of the state, so that in effect that State enterprises are be better prepared for market economy and the society knows how to exercise its rights and use forthcoming opportunities. It is also necessary to carry a profound reform of the state administration. The Polish state must overcome the paralysis of 'incompetence and inefficiency. It must stop the growth of corruption that constitutes a major threat to its functioning and -demoralizes the administration officials/he administrative reform should be accompanied by the preparation of new promotion mechanisms so that all the talented people will be offered better career prospects]"
Radical reforms call for a broad collaboration of the entire society, its commitment and a shared responsibility for their success.
- POLAND'S POLITICAL SCENE
       We witness the emergence of a democratic system in Poland and if it is to function it needs political parties and political culture which will entail greater readiness to reach compromise and to cooperate irrespective of differences.
The Union's attitude to post-solidarity parties
       People who had emerged from the Solidarity movement established many political parties and we welcome this as an indispensable factor of political plurality. We are convinced that their cooperation for the benefit of Poland is possible and necessary. We think it is possible for us to cooperate with those parties whose ideals and, goals are convergent with those of the Solidarity trade union.
 The 'Union's attitude to post-communist parties (SdRP , OPZZ, etc)

	
Although communism has collapsed in Poland  there are organizations and people who are responsible the past. If we recognize all those who once collaborated with communism as credible partners in 'public life .they must honestly square the accounts with the Past.
- REFORM OF THE STATE
In Poland a new political system is in the making, a new: constitution will soon be adopted. In the meantime we live in the transitory period and many state agencies do not discharge their functions properly; particularly control and financial agencies/ For the reform to succeed we heed not only a state ruled by the, law; but also a state that will be strong and efficient, that will guarantee its citizens the observance of the law, order and safety.
The state of the law, administrative reform, law enforcement/
       We have inherited from communism a caricature of a juridical system which must be changed as quickly as possible. It is also necessary to compensate for at least a part of the past injustice. It might be necessary to levy retroactive taxes on all those revoltingly excessive incomes which were made because of high positions and special opportunities (the nomenklatura joint-stock companies) 
       It does not suffice to enact laws, it is necessary to ensure that they are enforced -quickly and widely. Only the enforcement of the law and an efficient administration may serve as the foundations of the state of the law/
New prospects of promotion for all/
       One of the reasons of our current difficulties is the absence of new personnel: many people are of the opinion that their professional talents and zeal are not used to the fuller. This must change so that everyone is offered prospects of being promoted in the; state administration and that substantive factors will be decide about those promotion. It is also necessary to
break down the administrative mafias.
Work in politics and the administration (politicians, clerks and officials) viewed as the public service for the benefit of the people	.

We must restore the primary, meaning of public service so that a job in the state administration or in police is perceived as a service to the citizens.
The same holds for the way politics are pursued those who become professional politicians should recognize that their work for the government or parliament is a public service: and requires sacrifices,( and it is only then that one
can demand them from others), therefore' they• must: discontinue	
their business activities and: inform' the public about the current
level of their personal income
Regionalism
       Poland needs to reform its local authorities because the   present administration is totally unprepared and inadequate f(44 the tasks facing it is indispensable to establish large provinces named with their historical names which will have their own local governments and the central government will delegate some of its owners to them, e.g., shaping of regional or industrial policies This will take time and money, and Poland's situation is difficult and it may not afford those reform However, regionalization may be carried out gradually, by establishing ministerial delegacies, by developing telecommunication networks, administrative and police structures.
Parallely, the existing structure should be abolished, Cooperation with local government
       Local government does not know how to cope with the tasks it faces and therefore its future is in danger. It necessary to establish some institutions which will help local governments and become a part of a new system/
- QUALITY OF LABOUR AND PROSPECTS OF EMPLOYMENT
       In Poland work quality has fallen; it will take a long time to restore proper working conditions, work quality and respect for it To do this we need the participation of three sides: trade unions, employers and stated. Adequate parliamentary legislation will be needed as a starting point.
Support for the unemployed.
       The reforms f the Polish economy will make many people change their jobs. In these circumstances the unemployment measures cannot be simply reduced: to unemployment benefits it

is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs is necessary to offer help in finding new jobs  to create new jobs and  to organize public works. 
Mass scale re-training	
It is not true that we do not know how to retrain people and that we have not got the necessary facilities. It is imperative, to recognize this issue as the fundamental one and to employ all the existing resources and the existing institutions (agencies for professional upgrading a d many others and to adjust their operation to local needs. Finally, it is indispensable to co - employees that re-training is crucial far their future;

- Public works
Public works continue to be no more than a slogan and in the meantime we see that a greater number of areas are affected by structural and permanent unemployment which calls for immediate steps to organize public works/
Labour relations, co-governance of industry
Side by side with the development of private economy the role of employee self-government is being restricted - this, however, should not mean hat an employee will have no say about his place of employment It is necessary to work out new methods and ways of employee participation in the decision-making about their company so that they have a genuine impact on what is going on in a private company (e.g., when employees can elected one third of the members of the supervisory board and when those elected by them decide about the selection of a personnel manager) and can effectively defend their dignity and rights). To this end it is necessary to adopt parliamentary legislation on employee participation in company management and to amend the commercial code.
Working conditions and work safety
A come back to capitalism frequently means that work conditions deteriorate and our major task in parliament will be to stop that process In our struggle for better working conditions we will rely on work safety inspectors/
- LIVING STANDARDS
The current social policy must rest on two underlying premises:
- That we live in a transitory period marked by rapid and profound social changes resulting from the reforms and that they must be accompanied by a special social policy which will propose emergency measures;
-that social policy is pursued by the state must also involve social organizations, religious communities and local governments.
 	
	
	


  
 The social policy must take into consideration the interests of all vulnerable groups of society:- pensioners, handicapped, disabled women, younger people and children; it must be based on a´ premise that the family is the place where people spend most of their lives. 
We the consumers , we know how to fight for our rights as employees and we must learn how to fight for our rights as consumers In order to do this we need to set up special agencies, adopt new legislation that will protect consumers, ensure proper quality of goods, fair competition and advertising./
Retirement and disability pensions
       It is our utmost duty to defend the poorest and those who live in the most dramatic conditions: the retired and the disabled whose pensions are lowest (I and group). Everything else must be subordinated to that obligation.
Health care and welfare services
Health care must be at the service of patients and the rest ensues from that./
General education/
Protection of cultural property/
A place to live

To have one's own apartment – a place to live – is one of the most fundamental needs of man. That is why it is necessary to develop tenement housing – to construct cheap flats for people with little money and to offer easily accessible housing credits/
We opt for the market oriented housing provided the following conditions are met:

– Tenants are unconditionally protected in winter and in colder seasons.


- no eviction of tenants right into the streets- they should be offered some substitute tenements;
- full compensation for rising rents through increased wages,
The present system of cheap rents and subsidies to apartment houses results in a situation that those who have no flats of their own pay for those who have extra large apartments. That is why no one is interested in the construction of blocks of flats  (apart from individual private houses)and no one can afford the costs of their maintenance. 
Environmental protection/.
The structure of individual incomes	
The economic reform which is currently implemented in Poland contributes to greater inequalities in the society„and that is why we must ensure that;
* higher taxes are levied on higher incomes, so that they b/come comparable with those in the West European countries;/
* the government departs from the concept of the excess wage tax by raising the basis of taxation which will contribute to the rise of the lowest and average wages.
- THE ECONOMY
The economy must be at the service of people and this is what we will always stand by; everything else must be subordinated to that overriding principle. 
Industrial policy, creation of new jobs.
It is indispensable to formulate clear principles of the industrial policy and to present them to the public so that everybody knows what to expect. 
We need:
* detailed and precise information about the present condition of Poland's economy (accompanied by an analysis of the situation in particular branches and the forecast of their prospects for the future);	
- assistance in preparing regional programmes, in the first place for those regions which are in danger of particularly high unemployment, the programmes that will focus on the creation of new jobs.
- a clear- cut system of tariffs ( to establish such a level of customs duties which will protect Polish enterprises and to levy higher duties on luxury goods)
- principles of access to foreign credits that have been earmarked for Poands (expertise as to how enterprises can get hold of those credits).
- to resolve the indebtedness of Polish state enterprises (programmes for conditional reductions of some debts which were contracts to promote exports of commodities, services and know- how)


- a programme for expert services to those companies which seek them
All this should prepare state enterprises to the functioning in market economy and facilitate a rapid growth of private companies.
The construction of the capitalist infrastructure
In order to be productive, companies need to function in an adequate environment - they need efficient banks, telephones, good roads and rapid transportation, property rights, efficient administratio9., comprehensive and easily accessible economic information/his will require investment supported by the state and measures focusing on the development of that infrastructure/ As for the privatisation
Privatisation must be carried along all the accessible paths, it must be rapid and determined, particularly focusing on the so-called small privatisation which should stimulate the growth of small companies - which are decisive of how the market function. A major task before the Solidarity trade union is to protect employee interests and their jobs/to ensure the employee participation in the privatisation process so that they have a say about the future of their own enterprise/and to see to it that those of-them who are willing to buy a part of the national assets and start their own companies are given that chance. 
During the privatisation process part of the national assets should go to local governments, insurance companies, universities and charity associations.	.
 
Assistance to small companies
Apart from the small privatisation the promotion of small companies is the best way to create a group of Polish entrepreneurs- the middle class the existence of whish is an indispensable condition for the functioning of the market economy. The state should work out a programme of fostering and assisting small companies. 
Due to its social structure (small farms run by elderly people)'agriculture calls for a separate state policy /IT should promote the development of the food processing industry and agricultural services'  well as launch investment projects for the development of rural infrastructure (country roads, transportation, telephones, water supply systems, sewage)/
- POLAND IN EUROPE A road to Europe
Poland must consolidate its position of a sovereign state/ Our goal is to become integrated with the European Community/1 but this must be done in recognition of Poland's interests, traditions and by preserving of our cultural identity/
In solidarity with the peoples of Eastern Europe
For many years Poland shared its fate wi h other peoples of Eastern Europe that lived under the domination of the communist empire. Common experiences become a foundation for the future friendly cooperation. his calls for broader contacts between those states, freedom of movement of their citizens, commodities and services, and cultural exchange/he starting point of that cooperation was the ''Message to the Peoples of 'Eastern Europe" adopted by the I Solidarity Trade Union Congress/ Minorities in Poland
The restoration of the state sovereignty is frequently accompanied by various conflicts among minority and religious groups which fpr many years were not allowed to surface? We need a lot of patience and good will on the part of all the people concerned, but first of all on the part of the majority, to live together and 9bserve the principles of tolerance and friendly coexistence. We will try to attain that goal.
- Where to put it the church, younger people, women and family.

