Poland heading towards a democratic capitalism 
The election declaration adopted by the ALL-POLAND CONFERENCE of the Liberal Democratic Congress


We are liberals. We are for an open society that lives in freedom. We acknowledge the need for tolerance and compromise respecting private property. We welcome individual initiative, entrepreneurship and good work. We wish to pursue rational and pragmatic policies.
We are democrats. We wish to open the broadest possible access to liberal values.

Poland has embarked on transformations of major significance. If this country is to become a part of today's civilization it must overcome the post communist slump and to catch up with others after three centuries of lagging behind.
In more distant past the lack of the strong bourgeoisie and the feeble state structures eventually resulted in the loss of Poland’s freedom; weak capitalism and middle class in 3rd century, as well as the fact that the Second Polish Republic had too little time to make up for the existing areas in the interwar period - all this accounts for both qualitative and quantitative difference that exist between Poland and West European states. However, the present crisis stems primarily from an attempt to carry into a life a communist utopia, the utopia which discarded liberal values le liberal organization of public life.
We are faced with a difficult task of bridging the existing civilization gap. 

This is why we need liberalisms, viewed as a system, of values and a mode of operation. it is in line with that tradition that the Liberal-Democratic Congress wishes to organize economic, social and political life.

We intend to shape Poland’s life according to the model of western civilization which can be best labelled as a democratic capitalism. There is no third way for Poland. We wish to participate in the shaping our larger homeland- Europe.
We opt for:
- the restoration of the civic sense of duty
- the restitution of private property and market economy
- the establishment of a strong state but with restricted ability to interfere;
- the identification of Poland’s new place in Europe and worldwide 

A FREE AND RESPONSIBLE CITIZEN

The civic commitment of the greatest part of the Polish society is a key to the transformation we propose. A citizen becomes the subject of any economic, public and political activity. He is the man who always acts mindful of his responsibilities and who knows how to best exercise his freedom. He is an initiator and active participant of a variety of ventures.
The human rights must be constitutionally guaranteed. But it is the man himself who can exercise them. According to the Liberal- Democratic Congress a stable society needs an adequate environment in which civic virtues can surface and be respected. To this end it is indispensible to establish a large group of people who will be financially in dependent, capable of exercising their rights and fulfilling their duties. A stable democracy needs a large middle class.

According to the Congress the best way to ensure the growth of the middle class is via development of private ownership and creation of conditions facilitating honest accumulation f wealth by individuals with the help of their initiative and hard work his group will be made of active people, ready to learn and acquire new professional skills., That is why we opt for the development of labour market promotion of small businesses and general participation in the privatisation of state property.
Civic responsibility stems from one's own ownership title and background. 
Hence the concern for an individual's closest environment: his own house, company, street and town. Hence the feeling of being at 7- home, feeling of safety which is indispensable if one is to become a part of social and economic life.
To be a citizen is to continuously take part in community life at the local and regional level, in various associations and state agencies.
One can become involved in the activities of local government or defend various interests and attain a' number of, goals by working for trade unions, ecological movements, and charity organizations. 
The third dimension of public activity makes it possible for individual to become elected or, elect others to central authorities. There is also, an additional opportunity to participate in public life by casting votes in various referenda organized either centrally or locally.
We call for the greatest possible number of citizens who represent various viewpoints and have their own spiritual integrity to participate in social and political life. That is why the liberal-Democratic Congress is convinced that Poland ,needs to follow more  one way towards private ownership; it should follow parallel paths  which will be complement one another/We opt not- restrict the areas of privatisation to manufacturing and commerce; ' we also see the need to privatised schools, universities, health care, insurance, pension schemes, etc.


We see hope in those measures that create real prospects for citizens to take privatisation in their own hands of utmost importance is that a civic spirit of entrepreneurship materializes via the establishment of new companies from scratch, and particularly of family firms. Restitution of property rights is another measure, although its application has many limitations.
The Congress acts on a premise that it is necessary to create conditions that will open Poland to foreign capital should contribute to the transformation of the entire ownership structure and the adjustment of Poland's economy to the standards that prevail on world markets1
Privatisation vouchers, the concept of which has been advanced and worked out by the Congress, should become a useful Instrument of mass scale transfer of ownership rights. The vouchers will offer prospects of ownership for the society, which is a precondition for the emergence of the democratic capitalism.

The transformation of the ownership structure in Poland’s economy is for the Liberal-Democratic Congress a fundamental but not the only component of the new market economy order. Poland will score an economic industrial and agricultural policy pursued by the state- for it is the state that must initiate the process of adjustment of the Polish industry and agriculture so that they can face up to the international competition.

The market economy favours those who perceive it as a chance for themselves. It relies not only on private ownership and entrepreneurship but also on work from which the majority of citizens benefit. To work efficiently it is necessary to reconcile the interests of the employee- good work stands for good organization, respect for an employee and clear -interdependence between the works done and pay. This interdependence should also manifest itself in a broad system of individual savings and private insurance.
At the same time the society cannot exempt itself, from the responsibility for those who for the reasons which do not depend on them cannot find a place for themselves in the competitive market economy. The area of social welfare should not, however, be solely a responsibility of the state. Whenever such possibilities arise, welfare should be gradually transferred in the hands of social organizations and local government. They should not, however, pursue traditional welfare activities which actually contribute to the expansion of poverty and indifference, but should help those in need to regain their economic independence.

STRONG BUT RESTRICTED STATE

We aspire to a civic society of free and responsible citizens, safe in their vested right. Although an open society does not possess a preconceived shape, it is based on lasting principles of coexistence between free people. One of such underlying principles is the principle of a limited role of the state/A state restricted by a body of laws should ensure the broadest possible space in which its citizens can pursue their activities in all walks of public life. Each of us is entitled to choose his own viewpoint, profession and life style.
The state should safeguard the rule of the law and the coexistence of its citizens. It will be able to function effectively provided its-, competence is restricted and it disposes of an efficient executive apparatus. The state also needs highly skilled officials and efficient policy.
 
An independent judiciary should be the supreme agency of the state:
That is why a stable and 'comprehensive legal framework is essential. The freedom of citizens depends on whether the law is universally observed.
Public authorities should rest on the President of the Polish Republic and parliament consisting of two houses, both elected in general elections. The executive powers should be in the hands of government.


	

Public authorities should rest on the President of the Polish Republic and parliament consisting of two houses, both elected in general elections.

The executive powers should be in the hands- of government.
The participation of citizens in public life should be limited to periodical elections to various bodies of central administration.

Self government and various independent social and professional organizations are best to shape ,public maturity and responsibility of individuals, and they serve as local and professional communities where elites are formed. The decisions are most adequately made by those whom they concern. 

Decentralisation of public life and local government do not merely epitomize greater responsibilities, they must rest on solid legal and financial foundations.
The priority that liberals give to freedom also demarcates the boundaries of the majority rule, which is the element of democracy. Democracy as a way of public decision making and educating citizens works best when it it is limited by the rights of minorities and human rights
Parliamentary democracy is based on the party system. Democracy needs political parties which manifest a variety of political options of their electorate/
The liberal-Democratic Congress highly appreciates local specificity. Self-government is but one factor contributing to the decentralisation of Poland's life.
It is also necessary to establish institutions that will act as intermediaries between local communities and the state. This function can be best fulfilled by regional administration./ Poland's regionalization should be carried out in keeping with the principle of local autonomy. 
In Poland's, context regionalization will be carried out without undermining state integrity which is guaranteed by the constitution and systemic practice. Regionalization is one of the pillars of the democratic capitalism.
 
POLAND'S PLACE IN EUROPE AND IN THE WORLD

 	
It was for two or even, three- centuries that the geopolitical awareness of subsequent generations of` Poles was marked by the feeling of constant threat posed by Poland's eastern and western Germany. 
Poland’s position in the buffer zone between expansionist Germany and Russia entirely affected its foreign policy that took place on the European continent after World War II the crisis of the Soviet Union in the late eighties rise to a new situation we were free to decide about we. Were, faced with the choice of a political path that will be most beneficial from the point of view of Poland's security and civilization advancement.
In the west Poland borders not only on the united- Germany but also on the western civilization which is becoming more and more integrate  In the east we see the collapse of a totalitarian empire  as a result of which new and democratic states can emerge. Those two processes are very favourable to Poland.
Poland's experiences in overcoming a totalitarian system and the construction of the democratic capitalism may serve as an inspiration and be helpful to the societies that live behind our eastern horde  The Liberal-Democratic Congress will continue to foster cooperation with our close neighbours and support a dynamic expansion to their markets by Polish entrepreneurs.
Our foreign policy with the West should ensure Poland's rapid admission to the established community structures - including the security system - and refrain from any steps that could undermine or weaken those structures/
That is why Poland's relations with Germany and the United States are of key significanc./6ermany as a NATO member and a state closely linked with the United States must be perceived by Poland's diplomacy not as a potential adversary but as a very important partner. One must be aware that our full membership in the community structures and our input in western civilization will be largely determined by Poland's good neighbourly relations with Germany. 
Active commitment on the part of the United States continues to be of great significance to the processes currently, under way in Europe and the western world. This country continues to decide' to a great extent about the security and stability of this continent, so it comprehensive relations with the United States can only help Poland's diplomacy to attain its goals.

Liberal Democratic Congress is of the opinion that Poland's geographic location facilitates its participation in regional agreements that will supplement and facilitate integrating processes of the western civilization. Two areas of regional cooperation seem to crate special opportunities for Poland so that it can become active and advance initiatives. The cooperation in the region of the Baltic Sea involves cities in Germany, Denmark. Sweden, Finland, Russia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland and is an example of economic ties between the countries which are members of the European Community and those states which are currently committees to overcoming their totalitarian past.


The cooperation between the Baltic States has its southern counterpart in the Pentagonal group which Poland Chechnya-Slovakia and Hungary are involved Poland should play an active role in both regional agreements by advancing initiatives and act as a natural liaison between the north and the south .of Europe/
A day to day economic, social and political life within the framework of the liberal order is completely alien to Poland's past experiences. 
The transformation of the entire public life needs time an cannot be accomplished without an enormous effort and conflicts It will inevitably entail the need to renounce form r habits which continue to be present in our behaviour and thinking.
When embarking on the development of a modern civilization in Poland we must be prepared to learn from the experience of all and everyone in particular. On departing from communism we must learn entrepreneurship, how to cope with new situations, how to take risk, develop one's abilities and work diligently. We must also learn how to become the responsible participants of public life, how to struggle in defence of one's interests by way of discussions and negotiations, how to seek compromise with other people.
Poland's liberal reconstruction will result not only in hardships 2,
but also in the satisfaction which can be derived when obstacles are overcome. Guided by the liberal principles we can consolidate our faith in our own possibilities and the success of the, steps we take. The greater the number of people and civic groups willing to accept with us the responsibility for their fate and the -fate of the entire country, the greater the prospects that we shall quickly and efficiently cover the path to attain the goal of our full participation in modern civilization. 
