The Centre Alliance
THE PROGRAMME OF THE CENTRE ALLIANCE

WARSAW, SEPTEMBER 1991
A major goat before us is to rebuild a strong, democratic and fully sovereign Poland.
Our priority is Poland's raison d'etre. We are not satisfied with Poland's present status of a buffer state situated in a very unstable intermediary zone. We do not agree to Poland's former and present dependencies/We cannot also come to terms with the fact that foreign troops are stationed in Poland's territory. e also think that a major mistake is being made when a third way is proposed which can result in Poland's isolation and subordination to alien interests. Poland's security and civilization development are only then possible when we become a part of West European alliances and communities.
There is no security and prosperity in a country that does not enjoy its full sovereignty. We shall have no justice and democracy unless we totally dissociate ourselves from the communist past. The
Alliance is of the opinion that Poland's needs decommunisation. What we mean by it is a profound reconstruction of the institutions, economic mechanisms and social relations that are a communist legacy)and a dismissal from top positions in the state administration, police, banks and state control agencies all the former functionaries and activists of the communist party and the allied parties. An end must be put to inequitable division of this society into those who are a privileged minority and those who are a disappointed majority and do not see any prospects for promotion for them.
We' will put this state into order so that it serves the entire-people. The Polish Republic that we want to build cannot be a follow-up of the Polish People's Republic - it will break with the enforced compromise of the Round-table and with the policy of a "thick line", it will free itself from the communist burden and restrictions, it will combat chaos, corruption and the prevailing feeling of hopelessness.
We aspire to a safe and, just state and that is why we opt for strong and efficient authorities. Only strong and democratically elected authorities are capable of protecting Poland's vital interests, to enforce the observance of the law, to check a dangerous process of the decomposition of state institutions. We opt for an efficient Parliament, a strong government and for a loyal cooperation between Parliament and the cabinet and the President We shall spare no effort to ensure that Parliament adopts a new constitution that regulates the 'functioning of the supreme state authorities. Poland cannot afford that mess and constant bickering of state officials
We intend to carry out profound and radical transformations but we oppose going to any extremes). We are a party that speaks on behalf of millions of ordinary Poles by appealing to their sense of responsibility and their common sense. We hope to gain the support of those groups of society who cherish Christian traditions and are prepared to base the future prosperity of the Polish Republic on the lasting values which we have inherited from Christianity. We opt for the autonomy of the Church and the state and cooperation between the two.
Sovereign and safe Poland should find its place in Europe shaped by Christian and democratic values.
We attach great significance to the cooperation between the states of the "triangle": Poland, Czech-Slovakia and Hungary/We want those states to take part in the process of integration with the European Community and western security structures.
We opt for an innovative and active policy towards our eastern neighbour which will foster direct contacts not only with the central authorities in Moscow, but also with the 9overnments of the republics which want to regain their independence.
Russia has been Poland's very important partner. We will promote comprehensive relations with independent Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. We attach great significance to close cooperation with the Ukraine. By pursuing our eastern foreign policy based on understanding and cooperation with our Eastern neighbours we shall take very special care of our compatriots who live outside Poland/
We express our readiness to develop good neighbourly and beneficial relations with Germany. We hope, however, that their policies will be unequivocal and will respect Poland's national interests.
Poland's security and well-being of its citizens depend on its economy. We cannot, therefore, passively come to terms with the deepening recession and we cannot accept that there is no alternative to the current economic policy We do have our own alternative programme for the reconstruction of Polish economy but it will depend )on the electorate whether that programme will be implemented by the future cabinet.

We are of the opinion that a major r task before a new government is to animate Poland's economy Therefore we need a radical transformation of budget, monetary and revenue policies. The budget should observe the, deadlines in meeting the liabilities it has towards the citizens and companies. We can accept a temporary higher budget deficit because it will animate the economy and spur the growth of production It is necessary, however, to lower interest rates and to depart for  the excess wage tax. Those changes should not stimulate price hikes - their role is to contribute to production growth and to employ the unused production equipment.
Excessive taxation of citizens and enterprises is a significant -deterrent of the economic growth. We opt for moderate taxation which will stimulate savings and investment.
Lower taxes stimulate entrepreneurship and the production sector which is the main source of budget revenues. We shall introduce an equitable taxation system. we propose to levy equal taxes on
3 enterprises/and a progressive taxation on individual incomes. The rules of taxation should be stable and cannot be subject of free interpretation by revenue offices/Such a system of taxation will prevent dishonest taxpayers from evading payment and will be clear to every citizen. Such a taxation system does help promote the economic growth/
We shall pursue a considerate and long-range industrial policy
'which will foster entrepreneurship. We think that it is impossible to build an economy that will be capable of facing pp to foreign competition without an active involvement of the state while pursuing the industrial policy the state should promote the development of infrastructure - roads, power lines, telecommunications, without which no economic growth is possible. It is also necessary to develop export capacity and to create prospects for less developed regions of the country/ d small and medium sized companies.
Through its taxation policy the state should also have an active. 
It is influence on the promotion of the preferred branch of industry.
Adequate tariff policy should be pursued to that end .We think that it is necessary so to direct the influx of foreign investment that its corresponds with the goals of the strategy of industrial development.
If we are to become a modern and economically developed country we must transform our agriculture and upgrade the living standards in the countryside. This cannot, however, be attained by a single measure - what is needed is a long term process It must be initiated not by bringing the existing farms into ruin but by creating new employment opportunities in the countryside. 
State credits are needed as well as its support for various .kinds of farmers' mutual funds.
To date a major problem before agriculture is the sale of produce./ We think that this problem could be solved by:
- more animated exports and the search for new markets/
- protection of the domestic market against subsidized products from the West/
- offering credits and attractive taxation systems for the entire agricultural environment, particularly purchasing agencies, trade companies and firms processing agricultural produce/
The agricultural policy will guarantee stable incomes for farmers and greater prospects of investment in agriculture We shall support family farms which will be well equipped with machinery, economically sound and market oriented.
To this end the state will support the development of modern infrastructure in the countryside: water, power and natural gas supply systems, telecommunications his should improve radically farmers' living and working conditions.
For over four decades the communist cadres (the nomenclature) wasted the nation's capital assets/We opt for the quickest possible transformation of ownership to the effect that citizens and employees become share owners of privatized companies and that the stolen property is restituted to its legitimate owners of which they were sup in the forties and fifties also sup support privatisation via sales of shares to domestic and foreign investors.
The goal of privatisation is to enhance the productivity of enterprises. However, privatisation and reprivatisation (restitution of property) should not bring negative side-effects, such as corruption and embezzlements and should be carried out in respect for employee interests We demand that the practices of selling the national assets for no money at all be stopped as quickly as possible because they undermine the credibility of ownership transformations. Let us put an end to corruption and embezzlements which currently accompany the privatisation process.
The privatisation of national property should offer prospects of equal opportunities rather than - as it has been the practice today - deepen the differences in material wealth. All the citizens must be allowed an access to privatisation.
It is the duty of the state to prepare its citizens for life in a new economic system. Only very few have so far been offered that chance.' Most frequently workers of large enterprises and farmers have been deprived of it. We shall firmly safeguard the interests of the all groups of society because it is inadmissible that those who were most harmed by communism now cannot benefit from the reforms.
We shall see to it that the reforms do not result in the emergence of the capitalism of poverty where wealth is accumulated in the hands of very few. The reforms must open up new prospects for a dynamic economy of equal opportunities and solidarity in which each family will be capable to prosper and thus to contribute to the development of the entire country and the well-being of all
We shall spare no effort to create a lasting legal and economic framework for the operation of state enterprises offering equal development opportunities to all, irrespective of ownership Now that even efficient state enterprises go bankrupt under the burden of debts, capital tax and excess wage tax, when our cabinet is formed we shall immediately embark on an emergency programme for state enterprises the aim of which will be to bring about debt equity swaps. We shall also strongly promote the development of private companies.
The growth of the state is fostered by efficient and well organized work of all citizens/We want to restore the respect for solid work, enterprise and tradesman ship. But first and foremost, it is necessary to restore the interdependence between work and pay. We shall aim at transforming the wage systems which currently imposes artificial restrictions on legitimate increases of wages. We intend to quickly abolish the excess wage tax.
In the market economy a strong position of the manufacturer must be matched by the strong position of trade unions. It is necessary to fill with substance the provisions contained in the legislative package which regulates collective settlement of disputes and to establish a system of negotiations which will help avoid drastic conflicts
We shall endeavour to change the present system of unemployment benefits. 
We think that a differential between a minimum wages and an allowance should serve as an incentive to find another job. The level of the allowance should depend on the financial situation of the entire family.
The government should take more active measures to combat unemployment. We shall use systems of incentives to encourage investment in the regions affected by unemployment. We also intend to initiate public works and this way to develop transportation, telecommunications and power supply systems/ We shall foster municipal services and open access to credits for those who wish to start their own companies/We realize how vast the budget deficit is but we disagree with the view that the state presently cannot afford to protect more vulnerable people (pensioners, disabled people or families with many children/We are of an opposite view - it is now, at this difficult moment that the protection of the weakest is very important because the number of families living below the poverty line is growing.
A civilized European state, and particularly the state that espouses the Christian system of values, must find means and ways to ensure a dignified existence to those groups of the society who cannot earn their sustenance.
The cabinet that will be formed after the elections should immediately negotiate an agreement which will define a minimum of the state's commitments in the area of health care and pension schemes. Without any further delay it is necessary to reform the system of social insurance. The taxation mechanism and benefit scheme should meet the needs of families to a higher degree than before /B" creating a new model of social insurance we shall try to ensure that social and religious organizations play a more significant role in the area of welfare.
We think that it is of utmost importance to solve a major social problem of housing. The first step towards that goal is to straighten out the I gal framework of housing and to ensure state support for that sector Financial means should be earmarked for the construction of water and power supply and sewage systems for housing development and to create a system of mortgage credits so that even a family of modest income can afford an apartment.
The poorest will have access to municipal housing which will be financed directly by the state budget the state should also support those families that cannot pay the whole rent
If we aspire to a wealthy and thrifty Poland we must do our utmost to make its citizens responsible for the future of their country. That is why we attach such a great importance to genuine democracy in public life which is still pervaded by bureaucracy.
We shall support the development of genuine local self-government. After the elections of 1990 the state administration thwarted self-government activists and blocked the process of enlarging the powers of self-governments. A new parliament should create legal safeguards which will ensure that self governments pursue their own socio-economic local policies - briefly by ensuring the financial independence of local communities. As a result of the 1990 election, which was carried out in an atmosphere marked by the concept of the "thick line," local councils became dominated by corrupted post communists. While we continue to support local governments and autonomous regions we will also see to it that they do not result in the disintegration of our country. 
If the state is to function efficiently it needs expert and honest administration file present cadres are far from perfect - we maintain low paid and incompetent bureaucrats and their work gives rise to discontent on the part of the public One must be concerned by their manifest of responsibility and corruption, disregard for the law and citizens.
We intend to bring major changes in the functioning of the administration. We want to upgrade the professional standing of that group but in return we shall demand highest professional and moral qualifications. We are of the opinion that the reconstruction of Poland's administration will make it necessary to get rid of incompetent and discredited officials whose work brings disrespect on the state. We know that restarting will give rise to a lot of opposition of many influential groups but we shall not give up on that idea because we wish to ensure that state officials of the Polish Republic have confidence and respect of the society.
We shall particularly focus on such alarming social phenomena as corruption and larceny of national property. We disagree with a view that market reforms must be accompanied by dishonesty and injustice.
We will firmly demand that people who for personal benefits acted to
I the disadvantage of the state and other citizens are disclosed and punished. We condemn the policy which tolerates evil - unprosecuted crimes ruin the public sense of justice and must inevitably contribute to the disintegration of the state.
We intend to restore a high prestige of the law, jurisdiction and police. From the communist system we inherited a deeply rooted disregard for the law and we tend to evade the so called policy of the "thick line" has also caused a great deal of moral harm by exempting from legal responsibility all those who are guilty of injustice, crime and wrongdoing/n effect people no longer believe in justice and have been deprived of the sense of security - and this is a major social problem./
If the law is again to regulate public relations we need to, first and foremost, get rid of the legislative legacy of the former system as quickly as possible/Those  laws legitimized injustices and allowed for their free interpretation. Secondly, we should no longer postpone the exchange of staff in prosecutors offices and in jurisdiction. The society will have no confidence in police, public prosecutors and courts as long as there are people who have discredited themselves by collaborating with the communist system of repression and corruption hardly, it is necessary to show determination in our struggle with all evil and to show the society that the law can crack the crime his is the only way to restore the shaken sense of justice and to enforce the observance of the law.
We oppose any weakening Poland's military defences. Polish army should serve as the main safeguard of our security.
Poland is faced with an enormous task of modernizing its economic and social structures. The experiences of the states that have succeeded in this show unequivocally that by far most efficient and beneficial are investments in education/We are against any budget cuts for education.
The national culture shapes our identity. The culture must develop in order for a mature and democratic society to function. Right now we see a decline in cultural funding5We shall never allow for minimal budget savings that might result in such losses the cost of which will be incurred by the present and future generations.

IN ITS ELECTION PROGRAMME THE CENTRE ALLIANCE OPTS FOR:
- Efficient parliament governmental cooperation with -the president.
-  End to the state in disarray
- Quick adoption of the Constitution
-  Security for Poland/Greater efforts to obtain NATO security guarantees and organization of the army.
- Emergency economic programme for efficient state enterprises Promotion of private enterprise.
- Privatisation open to all apart from thieves/
- Preferential credits for viable family farm. 
- Protection of the domestic market of foodstuff.
- Banks for entrepreneurs and not for crooks.
- Decommunisation the administration, army, police, revenue cannot serve as a shelter for the former communist apparatchiks/
- Autonomy of the church and the state and the cooperation of the two.
- Respect for work/Better prospects for enterprising an hard working peoples Benefits for the unemployed and not for dodgers
- Powerful position of trade union' Honest and serious negotiations with employees.
-  Rescue programmes for education culture health care and social insurances. We shall not save on our children, the elderly and the disabled. 
