THE CONFEDERACY OF INDEPENDENT POLAND
KPN

HOW TO GET RID OF BALCEROWICZ
CR

HOW TO GET RID OF RECESSION, HIGH TAXES, EXCESS WAGE TAX, LOW PAYS, EXPENSIVE CREDITS, UNEMPLOYMENT, EXCESSIVE BUREAUCRACY, COMPANIES RUN BY FORMER COMMUNISTS (THE SO-CALLED NOMENCLATURE COMPANIES) AND ECONOMIC SWINDLES
AND
arrogant and inefficient administration, larceny of Poland, banditism and careerism
WHICH MEANS:
HOW TO SAVE POLAND? 
Ladies and gentlemen,
We address these words to You, hopeful that you will be willing to get familiar with our proposals which concern both You and Poland)We are not those who rule this country and that is why we are not loved either by the state television or by the press which is in the hands those who currently have power. The reason for this probably is that we are always outspoken in what we say and do, even though it might not be favourable for this government. Our absence on the radio and TV and the myths which have been circulated about us are the price that we have been paying for the past twelve years for being independent of those who rule and for representing the interests of the public."
We address you on the eve of the parliamentary election. We take part in it aware of the fact that we are one of the last major political groups that managed to maintain its hands clean while surrounded by a quagmire! We hope that in that multitude of swindles, corruption, political intrigue and selfishness we shall find some individuals who will be ready to support the KPN. That is why we invite you to have a closer look at our 'party and at what we propose in our programme.
We do not fear the truth!
Below we present our viewpoints on the major problems that Poland faces today. The election is at hand - this is the last chance to carry a genuine reform of our state. It is high time to sort the wheat from the chaff - to separate between those who want reforms, because they were once engaged in the struggle for them, and those who do no


more than talk about them and gain m' benefits fro the present situation, thus bringing this country into ruin. In order to choose, you must be aware of various options - and not only those advertised on the radio and TV. 
The leadership of the Confederacy of Independent Poland

WHAT SHOULD BE DONE?

Or the Confederacy's perception of major issues at hand.
- RECESSION. 
It is a condition in which people are too poor to afford the goods they manufacture. It is the opposite of development/Gives rise to a decline of the economy, unemployment and turns Poland into a large market for Western goods. It must be combated by lowering taxes, offering cheap credits for the promotion of production and by defreezing wages.
- WAGES
 Low wages result in low consumption. Low consumption results in recession/Recession results in low wages. In order to break this vicious circle it is necessary to embark on a consistent process of pay hikes so that in the course of 2 up to 3 years we reach the level of 50 per cent of the living standards of Western Europe!
- UNEMPLOYMENT
Poland cannot afford to waste labour. It is unacceptable to maintain that only mass scale unemployment can teach Poles how to work. Underlying this reasoning is contempt for one's own people and lack of concern for social and political consequences of such a situation. It is necessary to make every effort in order to curb mass scale unemployment via combating recession, launching public works, introducing tax reliefs, eliminating women's compulsory careers by increasing their spouses' wages.
- INFLATION
Contrary to what Balcerowicz promised nearly one and a half year ago inflation persists What we see is an increase of budget spending in order to thwart the inflation it is necessary to introduce sharp budget cuts in administrative spending and to earmark the money from privatisation for the promotion of free enterprise and creation of new jobs.
EXCESS WAGE TAX AND THE CAPITAL TAX (THE "DIVIDEND"). The excess wage tax has been levied on this society under a pretext of combating inflation and the money is used to pay thousands of state bureaucrats.).  The capital tax (or the "dividend") is a ransom that the state collects from state enterprises and largely accounts to their lower profitability. .and higher prices of commodities both taxes must be immediately abolished.
- BUREAUCRACY
 It has been inherited from the communists; it is totally passive and costs a lot of money. It is necessary to cut the number of state agencies, to reduce the number of jobs available in the state administration and to cut its budget
- LARCENY OF THE NATIONAL PROPERTY
Larceny flourishes. We see the emergence of the so-called "nomenclature" joint-stock companies (run by the former communists), the state administration is continuously shattered by one scandal after another in which government officials are involved/The only remedy to t is ailment is to ensure a strong and honest parliamentary opposition.
- JUSTICE
We will not have the rule of the law .as long as the prosecutor's office and the courts will continue to avoid prosecuting people in high government positions/
- CORRUPTION
- See above.
- CRIME. Well organized crime is growing/Only a special police unit consisting of people who did not work for the former police and the security service can efficiently cope with gangs and mobsters. 
- ARMY
When it is too large it becomes too inefficient and costly. It is necessary to give up the idea of an annual draft of 200 thousand young people, and instead to establish a regular army of several dozen professionals who will be well trained and armed.
- RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY PENSIONS, SOCIAL POLICY
It is necessary to introduce an insurance system in Poland which works worldwide. It is necessary to eliminate the existing monopoly of ZUS (the State Insurance Agency) and to ensure that there are many insurance companies one can choose from. The mandatory insurance rate that will make one eligible for health care and welfare services, assistance in emergency cases as well as retirement and disability pensions should not exceed 20 per cent of one's wages (the current rate accounts for 40 per cent). All people should have access to such insurance schemes/It is necessary to abolish privileged pensions, with the exception for those who suffered for Poland's independence and reconstruction Pensions must be high enough to ensure a decent standard of living.


- ECOLOGY
 It is imperative to observe the principle that those who damage or pollute the environment must pay for it such 'damages should not preclude penalties for the inflicted damages.	
Our programme was elaborated by a group of specialists, members of the Advisory Committee with Leszek Moczulski, KPN's leader. 
The entire text of our election programme is accessible at our District Election Headquarters or KPN offices. 
If you are familiar with our views and a prove of our stance: DO NOT BOYCOTT THIS ELECTION - VOTE KPN! If you wish our election success: HELP US WITH THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN! 
Come to KPN headquarters closest to your place of residence. 
FIND OUT HOW POWERFUL YOUR VOTE IS 
Balcerowicz has become a symbol of economic policy pursued by the two former cabinets headed by Mazowiecki and Bielecki which as a matter of fact were a followed-up what Rakowski with Wilczek and Seku a had done/Theirs was the policy of legitimizing nomenclature (the former communists), of maintaining and expanding state bureaucracy, overburdening the public with the costs of the current economic crisis. Theirs was the policy of high taxes, low wages and expensive credits.
How to get rid of that policy? How to get rid of Balcerowicz? It's simple! We were close to our goal when we voted against Mazowiecki for president - and when we supported other candidates like Wasa, Tyminski, Bartoszcze and Moczulski. Over 74 percent of the electorate did that. Wakesa won the election but he did not keep up to his promises - he succumbed to the West and did not dismiss Balcerowicz.
Tyminski left Poland; Bartoszcze was fired from PSL by the former communists.
How to get rid of Balcerowicz? By casting your vote for those who want to pursue A POLISH POLICY in Poland - not the WESTERN one not the SOVIET one (favoured by Cimoszewicz and Tymiñski's entourage) - but the POLISH policy endorsed by KPN.
It is not true that you have no say about what. is going on in Poland/By taking part in the parliamentary election you can protect yourself and Poland - provided you vote for the Confederacy of Independent Poland.
FIND OUT HOW POWERFUL YOUR V0TE IS!!!
    
Recently a politician told me, his voice tinted 'with disrespect: So what you have an alternative economic programme and know how to get out of this mess, if you do not know when to "forget" about Your Ideals and become a part of a political set=up with the help of which you will .acquire material -foundations for your activities this is, after all, a political tactic. 

This is not a political tactic./ This is a political prostitution.) There is nothing that KPN can be ashamed of. The fact that we do not change our opinions as if they were gloves, which has become a fad these days, and that we are not involved in all those swindles will benefit us in the future. I believe that there is a future before KPN because the day of honesty in politics must come. Otherwise we shall see a catastrophe in Poland".

PROTECTION OF AGRICULTURE
For half a century now Polish agriculture was exploited and ruined beyond any limits. Its present condition may result in a general catastrophe. It is necessary to put a stop to further exploitation of agriculture and countryside, to reject misconceived ideas about establishing large farms which will mean that nearly 90 percent of the existing farms will be ruined, and instead to create legal, civilizational and economic conditions fostering the development of family farms. It is also necessary to enhance the profitability of agriculture. This will require, among others, cheap credits to capitalize agriculture (elimination of • parasitic intermediary agencies because of which a farmer gets little while the consumer in the city pays a lot of money, finally, to create conditions favourable for produce exports.
WE CAN JOT DOWN THE BALLOT ONLY WITH ONE "X"! 
Otherwise the vote will be invalid By jotting that ,"X" you choose one list on which is your favourite candidate. So you can choose only one list and one candidate on that list.
CONFEDERACY OF INDEPENDENT POLAND
ITS YOUR LIST .
