ECONOMY
We opt for a consistent continuation of reforms aimed at the establishment of a modern and efficient market economy open to the world.
We are of the opinion that no effort should be spared in order to prevent political and economic chaos. It is necessary to shorten the present uncontrollable transition period and to define clearly the direction of the state economic, and particularly industrial policy.
Illusory and short-lived effects of the shock therapy employed by the current stabilization policy cannot be viewed as a means to improve Poland's current economic condition.
The transformations that we want to bring about go beyond the current problems of economic stabilization. They call for the transformation of the existing property relations, the establishment of institutions which will be indispensable for the proper functioning of the market economy, the restructuring of industry and modernization of agriculture the promotion of small and medium-sized companies and the identification of a new place for state enterprises, owing to the shortage of resources of the Polish society rapid and simultaneous changes in alt walks of Poland's economy are not only impossible but also unwelcome. Their effects can be contrary to what people expect and thus they can pose a threat to the economic safety of the state and the people. That is why it is indispensable that the state plays an active role and pursues a consistent economic policy which will specify the scope of reforms in each sphere of economy, the rate and cost of transformations. The decisions as to the economic policy will decide about the success of political reforms underlined by such universal values as freedom, justice and responsibility.
The process of transforming the existing property rights in Poland is sure to take many years. In the short run the greatest success may be scored by promoting small and medium-sized manufacturing, trading companies and services. They are flexible enough to rapidly adapt to the changing market and because of their low labour costs they might stimulate economically backward regions and employ excess labour force. 

Until recently only Polish craftsmen showed: such a high efficiency and flexibility. It will be of our most importance how the
existing potential of the private sector is used,' the more so that it survived the era of command economy and now may generate the middle class. Fresh incentives are needed for its further development a stable legal framework, clear cut and lasting taxation system and an easier access to credits.
However, the liberalization of wages policy and the reanimation of the entire economy which will overcome the consumption barriers due to the recession should be viewed as major prerequisites of further development of commerce, crafts and services. The community of craftsmen, vendors an people working in the service sector expect not only new incentives, but first and foremost that they will work in an environment operating according to the principles of free market economy and competition.
For many years to come the sector of state enterprises will continue to be a major component of Poland's economy and its condition will be decisive about then success or failure of the reforms launched in industry, agriculture and services continuing crisis of that sector poses a serious threat to the state budget and further development of the private sector. The need for the restructuring of industry stems from its high degree of concentration and the domination of capital and energy-intensive branches of heavy industry. It is indispensable to synchronize the closing of unprofitable state enterprises with the establishment of new companies, particularly in the light and consumer goods industries (food and agriculture, textiles, clothing, etc). They are marked by high economic efficiency and short time of equity return. Additionally, they create new jobs at a	relatively low cost. Those
enterprises in the first place should have access to credits granted by international financing organizations or by private investors, both domestic and foreign"
Because of the protectionist policy pursued by many highly developed countries towards goods imported from Poland (with the exception of Poland's traditional export markets in Western Europe) an important role can be played by the markets of Central and Eastern Europe and of the Soviet Union, as well as the markets of the Third World, highly diversified as they may be in terms of, required import and terms of payment.



Agriculture has a very special place for itself in the process of transforming Poland’s economy. As much as 30 percent of professionally active people are employed in agriculture; but for structural reasons in this region of Europe it is one of the least efficient sectors of economy. An outdated agrarian structure and the demand slump both on the domestic and foreign markets are the main barriers to modernization of Polish agriculture. The demand slump has also affected .agricultural produce and foodstuffs. Therefore we need such an agricultural policy which with he help of monetary and credit instruments as well as other incentives promoting the development of agricultural market (e.g., intervention buying by the state) will ensure decent living standards and working conditions to all farmers and stop the migration from the agricultural sector without any prospects of other employment. It is also necessary to control the so-called dishonest competition of imported foodstuffs.
The transformation Poland's economic system should also entail the changed attitude of political elites to the problem of wage formation and economic growth. A new economic policy should reverse the former economic trend of financing the economic growth by restricting the growth of real wages and consumption. This model of economic growth which is typical of many underdeveloped Third World countries is a major impediment to the development of modern market economy which should be steered by consumer demand. That is why the excess wage tax which serves as a negative incentive should be replaced by a system of personal taxes which function in highly industrialized countries.)
Reprivatisation is a separate problem in itself and at the same time it is a serious social and political issue. Only this property should be restituted which was unlawfully appropriated by the state. The former proprietors should be paid compensation in the form of privatisation vouchers or shares. The process should be financed by a fund created for mass privatisation.
The process of privatisation and reprivatisation should be subject to efficient control by constitutional bodies.
THE POLITICAL SYSTEM OF THE STATE
The Democratic Party opts for such a political state system which espouses DEMOCRACY - INDEPENDENCE – RESPONSIBILITY- TOLERANCE

As a democratic-liberal party the Democratic Party views the essence of its activities in the promotion of the freedom of an individual and the defence of his rights.
The fundamental principle should underlie the relations between citizens and the state which should safeguard individual freedoms and equitable social safety.
The principle of individual freedom must be closely linked with the principle of individual’s responsibility for his own fate.
In our opinion the democratic decision-making process is the best way to achieve a balance between individual responsibility and freedom.
The Democratic Party intends to pursue a policy devoid of any political games and demagogies’ promises that have little in common 'with actual capabilities of the state.
Man is a focus of our political, economic and social activities as we are aware that the well-being of citizens and the stability of the state are the best means to safeguard democracy. The functioning of democracy is not in its essence tantamount to the imposition of the majority will it is also a defence of minority rights.
That is why we respect and recognize the interests of national and religious minorities or people espousing different ideas whose rights may be subject to various curtailments. At the same time we oppose granting any specific minority privileges to the disadvantage of other groups of citizens.
The legislative system of the state must offer such regulations which enable a citizen to make a choice in keeping with his conscience. This choice must be free from any interference on the part of religious institutions.
Respectful of the long and great tradition of the Catholic Church in Poland and the role that Christian ethics play in our society we opt for constitutional guarantees of equality of religions and freedom of conscience.
The Democratic Party is consistent .in its aspirations to establish a democratic state of law which will be based on market economy. We recognize that it is indispensable to accelerate the process of amending the existing laws and drafting new bills which will regulate the most significant spheres of public life.




We are against any attempts at legislative rationing of human fate.
 The interests of the individual and the society must be reconciled in keeping with the principles of freedom, justice and protection of minorities We advocate a special section of a new constitution is devoted to human and civic rights.

We will, continue and strengthen the status of such independent bodies which ensure the rule of law as the Constitutional Court, the, Tribunal of State, the Supreme Administrative Court and the: Office of Ombudsman a spare no effort to ensure an adequate professional and financial status of fudges who discharge a very responsible function. 
We are, against the monopoly of the state television. Access to information and its dissemination have become the fourth power apart from parliament, government and judiciary. That is why we propose to increase the number of TV channels to ensure a free flow of information presentation of a greater variety of ideas and views.
They should be under a strict public control.
Access to personal files of citizens, should also be under a strict control. In the face of technological progress this area must be protected against a growing interference of various state bodies is also necessary to see to it that state agencies and some public organizations do not enjoy a privileged position in this respect.
The states external security should be safeguarded by a politically indifferent army. Our armed forces should be well organized and equipped and should rely on regular soldiers. Poland’s security system should embrace the territorial and civil defence. 
Highly professional and well equipped police force should protect internal order and the safety of citizens and their families. Mindful of our past experiences we emphasize that police should remain politically neutral and cannot become involved in political duties and controversies which are inevitable in a democratic society.
Both the police and the army should be ensured their public and professional safety by the legislator so that they can remain unbiased by various kinds of demagoguery.
The best decisions are made by the people themselves. That is why in our view various forms of self-government and local government are essential.
The tasks and competence local councils should be diverse depending on local situation and conditions in which they operate; we intend to establish an efficient: system that will finance local governments.

 

SOCIAL SECURITY
The Democratic Party postulates to establish a system of rights which will guarantee an individual a decent life. Each citizen is entitled to social security and it is the state that should fulfil its duties in this respect.
 The basic factors which make the citizens feel safe are the reduction of unemployment, prospects for one's' own apartment rational welfare and health care systems, healthy natural environment.
The state is obliged to pursue an active policy to curtail unemployment. With the help of a; variety of economic instruments the state, should support, various forms of re-training,- ,promo e, enterprise and offer incentives .:so that People open, their own firms.
We are o f the opinion, that every young man on the verge of adult .life should have real prospects of finding employment and a place to live. This is what the government should guarantee by introducing various legal and economic measures, i.e., by lowering personal income tax for school graduates during their first year of employment. 
The Democratic Party postulates to change the system of credits for the housing sector so that a flat becomes an attainable property and the current payments as well as interest of loans are not beyond the financial capacities of an average citizen.
We demand that a modern system of social insurance is quickly introduced so that it becomes independent of any political fluctuations and offers the retirees the living standards that will not be inferior to those they had in the days of their full-time employment.
The Democratic Party proposes to establish a variety of insurance schemes that will ensure a decent pension after many years of rate payment.
When a new health care policy is drafted it is necessary to specify to what extent the present health care system can be reformed. We are of the opinion that in order to improve the functioning of the health care system it  is necessary to carry comprehensive reforms which will enhance productivity and efficiency, decentralize management and :place it under the  public,: control, cut` unreasonable. Spending and ensure permanent sources of financing.
The reforms of the health care system that we propose entail the establishment of a market for.:' medical services by way of privatization and competition. The only possible way to finance health service is from the service supplemented by insurance funds.
State interventionism will be envisaged in the regions affected by ecological risk and in emergency situations.


It is essential to restore a family doctor. Specialist and hospital services as well as 
as well as diagnosing should be offered at market prices whereas family doctors should be financed by local  governments and in some cases (extra services)by the patients himself.	
We opt afar an evolutional transition to a new mode of health system operation.
We welcome health service self-government which 'will safeguard that structural reforms are carried out and in effect will "'contribute to an enhanced prestige of the medical profession and greater concern about the health of citizens. We recognize economic, social and medical needs of the disabled people and we demand that those needs are met The state has a very important role to play when it comes to prevention of disability. 
We will continue in our efforts for the benefit of the handicapped and disabled.
We propose to establish a National Foundation for Child Protection which will ensure that the younger generation is off red best possible conditions for its comprehensive development. The Democratic Party will advocate that idea./
As we clearly endorse the concept of sustainable development we also demand that comprehensive ecological legislation is adopted
It is indispensable to change the current ecological policy which so far has been of repressive nature and with the help of financial and structural instruments to promote initiatives and investment projects which are environmentally friendly. Considerable funds can be raised out of the privatisation of state companies and earmarked for environmental protection.


CULTURE
It is inadmissible to continue with the current practice of perceiving culture solely as a commodity in free market system without acknowledging its privileged position. We oppose, narrowly technocratic approach of drastic budget cuts in culture r 
Priority should be given to the programme of saving from extinction libraries and cultural centres in small towns and villages
We opt for such a legislation which will guarantee that a specific percentage of local budgets be earmarked for culture and education.
It is necessary to draft and adopt an act of law on cultural sponsorship which allow companies to allot part of their profits for cultural purposes and will ensure equal terms of financial operation for central and local cultural foundations whish will raise funds to promote various cultural projects and young talented people.

We intend to work out an updated programme for the protection of historical monuments and to integrate it with landscape protection, town and country planning, operation of foundations, privatization and reprivatisation processes. We propose to establish an efficient system of protecting local cultural traditions and supporting regional socio-cultural and scientific societies.
We opt for a comprehensive programme for the promotion of the Polish culture worldwide and the strengthening of cultural, scientific and educational ties with Poles settled abroad.
EDUCATION
Cognizant of the threats that are imminent in education we opt for:
the change of the current model of education to the effect that priority is given to highly qualified work which requires great intellectual skills, the establishment of a system which will guarantee a genuine access to general secondary education, greater organizational diversity of schools (private, corporate, religious, state schools, etc.).
It is impossible to modernize an educational system without greater budget spending/In order to ensure the change of the material foundations of the educational system it is necessary to change the current way of: financing and to introduce flexible solutions which will make it possible for the schools and educational institutions to multiply, the resources currently at their disposal.
The educational system should generate professional and political elites capable of running the socio-economic life of a developed European state. This goal should be attained to ensure the economic and trade integration with Europe. Universities will, meet this challenge provided they adjust their teaching methodology to, the needs of modern times. This goal should be attained to ensure the economic and trade integrations with Europe. Universities will meet this challenge provided they adjust their teaching methodology to the needs of modern times. In order for the universities to reach adequate educational efficiency it is necessary to:
- ensure closer contacts between Polish and the world science
- to ensure better university management and organization by more competent and responsible people

- improve the financial standing of universities by higher budget spending, greater university coverage of their own costs and financing their development from their own resources.




Poland’s Raison d’Etre
Poland is situated in the very heart of Europe and was bitterly scourged in the past. The relations with our closest neighbours can either assist or hamper the attainment of our goals. We should benefit from relations that have recently been established with Germany and the European Community. As our partner Germany enhances our prospects of becoming a part of the Western world can by no means weaken our efforts to establish best possible political and economic relations with our Eastern neighbours. Poland’s political and economic relations with the Soviet Unions should be based on new treaties and on mutual respect for our sovereignty.
We are of the opinion that while pursuing its foreign policy Poland should act on the following principles:


Poland shall never claim any territories of its neighbours and shall renounce any territorial claims addressed to her.
Poland shall promote friendly relations with all her neighbours and by fostering various forms of cooperation will pursue the policy of mutual understanding and reconciliation because the past cannot be changed and the future must be shaped for the benefit of the generations to come and the unity of our continent;
Poland shall pursue a policy consistent with mechanisms of international .peace and security as proclaimed by the Charter of the United Nations in the area of international trade Poland will adhere to the principles of free trade and navigation recognized by the international community of states as a transit country will ensure freedom of transit across and- above its territories.
Poland supports the initiatives of sub regional cooperation provided they are consistent with the overall trend of European integration; 
- in international relations with other states Poland respects sovereign equality in good faith observes international bilateral and multilateral commitments, renounces any form of discrimination, recognizes the principle of reciprocity and opts for the settlement of disputes by means of negotiations.
The Democratic Party is the party of the centre; its programme has not changed for decades as far as principles are concerned and it continues to seek inspiration in the ideas of freedom, democracy and tolerance.
Together with all those who espouse our ideals we wish to build a new Poland.
Our response to the question what kind of Poland we want, is:
- we want Poland of even civic responsibilities and equal opportunities for each individual now that we see the emergence of political economic, scientific and cultural elites.
- We want Poland where the ethos of good work prevails and where honest work becomes a source of wealth.
- we want Poland where every man is offered equal opportunities to attain his goals and where a young people find  prospects for creative wise and dignified life.
In short: we want Poland that is sovereign, democratic and safe.



