The Programme of the electoral catholic Action

The Electoral Catholic Action

It was establishes in order to face a challenge that the reconstruction of an independent, equitable and democratic state poses to all Poles in this coming election.
Christian and national principles must serve as foundations of that reconstruction. It was with their help, that we managed to preserve through the communist dictatorship. 
In the difficult moments of Poland’s history the Catholic Church played a special role in the shaping of our culture. This is what must not be forgotten. That is why we have fraternal feelings for all Christians and representatives of other denominations to whom dear is the well-being of our Motherland. We are of the opinion that a free election will mark the end of the period of transition and the final abolition of the atheist-collectivist system which held this society in captivity.

State of the Christian People

In Christian Terms, a social order eptomizes an order of love. Each of us is somebody else’s neighbour, but we have very special responsibilities to our family and in the next place, to the entire people which is a family of families (as Primate Wysznski once said), and finally to the entire humanity. In a Christian state each individual is guaranteed freedom, every family- proper conditions of development and the right to raise children in keeping with the values that they espouse to, and the entire people is guaranteed security.
A Christian Poland should be a state of justice and solidarity which transcends group interests. We are concerned to see the efforts to eliminate religion and the Church from public life. We opt for autonomy of the state and the Church and their cooperation for the common well-being of all. The Constitution of the Independent Polish Republic should guarantee natural freedoms and outline the duties of each man, family and the entire nation, the right to teach religion at schools, the respect for moral principles underlying public life in the mass media.

The Democratic Order

The independent Polish Republic must be a democratic and strong country. The equilibrium between the legislature (parliament consisting of two houses), the government and an independent judiciary should be safeguarded by the president furnished with adequate legal instruments which are indispensible to eliminate dangerous tensions and to overcome difficulties in the life of the state. The president should have the right to dissolve parliament, to veto parliamentary bills, to dismiss the government, to issue decrees which will enjoy a status equal to laws provided an authorization has been guaranteed by parliament. The state should rely on a broad economic, professional and cultural self-government to ensure the widest possible participation of citizens in public life. Self-government should also predominate at the provincial level of administration. This should give rise to sound aspirations to foster regional identity. We firmly endorse the concept of unity of the Polish sate and oppose such legal measures which could foster artificial separation tendencies.
The democratic order calls for determined prosecution of crime, higher sentences for petty and economic offences, and larceny national property. It is imperative to observe a fundamental principle of the rule of law- that those who exercise power-both people and institutions- are accountable before the law. It is necessary to prevent corruption by all means.

National Economy

It must rest on private ownership and free economic initiatives. it is the main duty of the state to protect the Polish national interests and the weakest group of society, to intervene whenever individuals or groups of individuals cannot cope on their own. The point is to ensure that all citizens can become owners. Right now it is most important to make decisive change in the direction of current economic policy: 
- to foster and protect domestic identity and agriculture.
- to support efficient state enterprises and to help foster private enterprise;
- To pursue a considerate policy towards foreign capital which should be put under control in order to enrich and develop Poland’s economy;
- to develop agriculture and  food processing by offering cheap credits, imposing custom duties and opening eastern and western markets to our produce.
In the state economic policy a priority must be given to family protection and support. Women should pursue their professional careers not out of economic must but out of free choice. It is also imperative to combat unemployment and not merely its effects.
Unemployment benefits should be paid on condition there exists a genuine willingness on the part of the unemployed to seek a new job.
We think that the supportive and protective role of the state particularly holds for such areas of public life as:
-the provision of new jobs , particularly in regions heavily affected by unemployment;
-housing development
-health care
- protection of pensioners

Let us keep in mind that the principle of solidarity, protection of the elderly and economically unproductive people is equally important as is the principle of probability.

Natural Environment

The concern for the natural environment is a responsibility that we must assume to ensure health to our people and secure life to our families, and it is our moral commitment to future generations. it is necessary to prohibit any economic activity that might be dangerous to the natural environment wherever it is necessary.

Reconstruction of national culture and improvement of public morality

It is imperative to restore public discipline, honesty and individual. as well as group credibility. These were the values respected by the generation that lived in Independent Poland and fought in the Warsaw Insurrection and owing to which they managed to survive communism. They bequeathed us their Christian and national values. It is necessary to support those public initiatives which promote national culture (the legislation on foundations, taxation policy, etc) and to oppose at the same time the propaganda of evil and violence which is so widespread in the mass media. School curricula and mass media should come back to those values that used to shape our civic awareness. This can be done by changing textbooks and retraining teachers. Such school subjects as history, Polish language and literature, sociology call for a completely new approach that will be free from any communist and materialistic influences.

Squaring the Accounts with the former system

it is necessary to restitute the property that was so once illegally appropriated by the political and economic successors of the former Communist party (the Polish United Workers Party). it is also necessary to prosecute all those who committed crimes against the Polish nation. It is necessary to ensure state security by an adequate shaping of such indispensable staff and structural changes in the Polish army. We do not call for vengeance. We wish to restore the feeling of individual, social and national safety. We want to be the hosts in our own house. We want to run our own house on our own.

Safe Poland in the Europe of homelands

We opt for Poland’s quickest possible membership in the all-European system of security. We think it is imperative for the Soviet troops to withdraw from our territory. We whish to foster economic, military and political cooperation with Hungary and Czech-Slovakia. We welcome good and mutually beneficial economic relations with the Soviet Union. We recognize the right to sovereignty of Lithuania, Byelorussia and the Ukraine. Our political relations with those states will depend on their attitude to the Polish minority that has been a host of those lands for centuries, but they will also be determined by their approach to Poland’s national interests. We consider it to be our duty to protect and support the Polish residents of those lands.




