PLATEFORME ÉLECTORALE PARTI LIBÉRAL DU CANADA 2015
ECONOMIC SECURITY FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS
A strong economy starts with a strong middle class.
Our plan offers real help to Canada's middle class and all those working hard to join it.
When our middle class has more money in their pockets to save, invest, and grow the economy, we all benefit.
We will give families more money to help with the high cost of raising their kids.
We will cancel tax breaks and benefits for the wealthy – including the Universal Child Care Benefit –
and introduce a new Canada Child Benefit to give Canadian families more money to raise their kids.
With the Canada Child Benefit, nine out of ten Canadian families will receive more than under Stephen Harper's confusing collection of child benefit programs.
For the typical family of four, that means an additional $2,500 in help, tax-free, every year.
Because the Canada Child Benefit is tax-free and tied to income, it also provides greater support to those who need help the most: single-parent families and low-income families.
Our plan will lift 315,000 Canadian children out of poverty.
Stephen Harper thinks that government should provide child support payments to millionaires.
We will end that unfair giveaway.
MIDDLE CLASS TAX CUT
We will give middle class Canadians a tax break, by making taxes more fair.
When middle class Canadians have more money in their pockets to save, invest, and grow the economy, we all benefit.
We will cut the middle income tax bracket to 20.5 percent from 22 percent – a seven percent reduction.
Canadians with taxable annual income between $44,700 and $89,401 will see their income tax rate fall.
This tax relief is worth up to $670 per person, per year – or $1,340 for a two-income household.
To pay for this tax cut, we will ask the wealthiest one percent of Canadians to give a little more.
We will introduce a new tax bracket of 33 percent for individuals earning more than $200,000 each year.
ENDING UNFAIR TAX BREAKS
We will cancel income splitting and other tax breaks and benefits for the wealthy.
Income splitting costs the federal government $2 billion a year but delivers benefits to only a few.
It will not create a single job.
It will not give one young person an opportunity to get ahead.
Income splitting delivers no benefits to working parents who earn similar salaries, no benefits to single parents, and no benefits to Canadians who do not have kids.
All told, income splitting benefits only about 15 percent of Canadian households.
We will cancel Stephen Harper's tax breaks for the wealthy,
to give Canadian families more money to raise their children.
OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUNG CANADIANS
We will invest to create more jobs and better opportunities for young Canadians.
After ten years under Stephen Harper, good-quality job opportunities for young Canadians are tougher and tougher to find.
Faced with high unemployment and underemployment, many young people have stopped looking for work altogether.
This is hard for both young people and their families.
Many parents are seeing their household debt rise and retirement savings dwindle as they struggle to support their grown children, who often return home.
It is time to invest in young Canadians – to help them get the work experience they will need to start their careers and contribute fully to our economy.
We will create 40,000 good youth jobs – including 5,000 youth green jobs – each year for the next three years, by investing $300 million more in the renewed Youth Employment Strategy.
We will more than double the almost 11,000 Canadians who access Skills Link each year.
This program helps young Canadians – including Aboriginal and disabled youth – make a more successful transition to the workplace.
After this initial three-year boost in funding, we will set the renewed Youth Employment Strategy 's funding level at $385 million per year – a $50 million increase from 2015/16.
We will invest $40 million each year to help employers create more co-op placements for students in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and business programs.
And to encourage companies to hire young Canadians for permanent positions, we will also offer a 12-month break on Employment Insurance premiums.
We will waive employer premiums for all those between the ages of 18 and 24 who are hired into a permanent position in 2016, 2017, or 2018.
We will also work with provinces, territories, and post-secondary institutions to develop or expand Pre-Apprenticeship Training Programs.
This will provide up to $10 million per year to help young Canadians gain the skills they need to enter high-demand trades.
We will end the rule that discriminates against new workers and those re-entering the workforce by requiring them to accumulate 910 hours of work to qualify for Employment Insurance benefits, including training support.
We will invest $25 million per year in a restored Youth Service Program, to give young Canadians valuable work and life experience, and provide communities with the help required for much-needed projects.
RETIREMENT SECURITY
We will provide Canadians with a more secure retirement.
After a lifetime of hard work, Canadians have earned a secure and dignified retirement, but too many now wonder when – or even if – that will happen.
We will help Canadians realize their goal of a secure retirement.
That security starts with a strong and stable pension program.
We will work with the provinces and territories, workers, employers, and retiree organizations to enhance the Canada Pension Plan.
We will not end pension income splitting for seniors.
We will also restore the eligibility age for Old Age Security and the Guaranteed Income Supplement to 65, putting an average of $13,000 into the pockets of the lowest income Canadians each year, as they become seniors.
We will help to lift hundreds of thousands of seniors out of poverty by increasing the Guaranteed Income Supplement for single low-income seniors by ten percent.
This will give one million of our most vulnerable seniors – who are often women – almost $1,000 more each year.
Because many seniors live on fixed incomes, we will introduce a new Seniors Price Index to make sure that Old Age Security and the Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits keep up with seniors' actual rising costs.
We will also make the Compassionate Care Benefit more flexible and easier to access, so that those who are caring for seriously ill family members – not just family members who are at risk of death – can access six months of benefits.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
We will make it easier for Canadians to find an affordable place to call home.
Today, one in four Canadian households is paying more than it can afford for housing, and one in eight cannot find affordable housing that is safe, suitable, and well maintained.
When affordable housing is in short supply, Canadians feel less secure and our whole economy suffers.
We will renew federal leadership in housing, starting with a new, ten-year investment in social infrastructure.
We will prioritize investments in affordable housing and seniors' facilities,
build more new housing units
and refurbish old ones,
give support to municipalities to maintain rent-geared-to-income subsidies in co-ops,
and give communities the money they need for Housing First initiatives that help homeless Canadians find stable housing.
We will encourage the construction of new rental housing by removing all GST on new capital investments in affordable rental housing.
This will provide $125 million per year in tax incentives to grow and renovate the supply of rental housing across Canada.
We will modernize the existing Home Buyers' Plan to allow Canadians impacted by sudden and significant life changes to buy a house without tax penalty.
This will ease the burden on Canadians facing job relocation, the death of a spouse, marital breakdown, or a decision to accommodate an elderly family member.
We will direct the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation and the new Canada Infrastructure Bank to provide financing to support the construction of new, affordable rental housing for middle- and low-income Canadians.
We will conduct an inventory of all available federal lands and buildings that could be repurposed,
and make some of these lands available at low cost for affordable housing in communities where there is a pressing need.
We will review escalating home prices in high-priced markets, like Toronto and Vancouver,
and consider all policy tools that could keep home ownership within reach for more Canadians.
We will also immediately restore the mandatory long-form census to ensure that decisions on housing are made using the best and most up-to-date data available.
POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION
We will make post-secondary education more affordable.
For too many Canadians, rising costs have made post-secondary education increasingly out of reach.
It is harder and harder for middle class families to save for their kids' education, while many lower-income families are not able to save at all.
At the same time, the federal government spends billions each year on non-refundable tax credits that offer little direct help for students when they need it.
We will provide direct help to students from low- and middle-income families to help them pay for their education and ensure that debt loads are manageable.
We will increase the maximum Canada Student Grant for low-income students to $3,000 per year for full-time students,
and to $1,800 per year for part-time students.
In addition, to help more students from middle class families qualify for Canada Student Grants, we will increase the income thresholds for eligibility, giving more Canadian students access to even larger grants.
This investment will be funded by cancelling the poorly targeted education and textbook tax credits.
The tuition tax credit will be maintained.
This will increase the level of non-repayable grant assistance to students by $750 million per year, rising to $850 million per year by 2019/20.
We will also make our student loan system more flexible.
We will ensure that no graduate with student loans will be required to make any repayment until they are earning an income of at least $25,000 per year.
This will be done by changing the income thresholds in the Repayment Assistance Plan for recent graduates.
The federal government will continue to pay the interest on student loans until graduates begin to earn sufficient incomes to take over their own payments and repay their own loans.
We will work with provinces and territories to ensure that they do not assume any additional costs,
and to make sure these investments go directly to students.
Appropriate compensation will be offered to provinces and territories that do not participate in the Canada Student Loan program.
We will also work collaboratively with provinces and territories
to improve promotion of RESPs and Canada Learning Bonds,
and to make registration simpler for all families.
We will invest $50 million in additional annual support to the Post-Secondary Student Support Program, which supports Indigenous students attending post-secondary education,
and will allow the program to grow in line with increasing demand.
A NEW HEALTH ACCORD
We will make home care more available,
prescription drugs more affordable,
and mental health care more accessible.
Canada's publicly-funded universal health care system is a source of pride for Canadians –
and a source of economic security for the middle class and those working hard to join it.
When Canadians are in good physical and mental health, they are able to work better, be more productive, and contribute more fully to our economy while living healthier, happier lives.
Despite our health care system's value and importance, it has been more than a decade since a Canadian Prime Minister sat down with provincial and territorial Premiers to strengthen the program, and ensure that it can meet current needs and the challenges that come with an aging population.
We will restart that important conversation
and provide the collaborative federal leadership that has been missing during the Harper decade.
We will negotiate a new Health Accord with provinces and territories, including a long-term agreement on funding.
As an immediate commitment, we will invest $3 billion, over the next four years, to deliver more and better home care services for all Canadians.
This includes more access to high quality in-home caregivers,
financial supports for family care,
and, when necessary, palliative care.
To help families care for their loved ones at home, we will make the Employment Insurance Compassionate Care Benefit more flexible and easier to access, so that it provides help for more than just end-of-life care.
We will also develop a pan-Canadian collaboration on health innovation,
and will improve access to necessary prescription medications.
We will join with provincial and territorial governments to buy drugs in bulk, reducing the cost Canadian governments pay for these drugs, and making them more affordable for Canadians.
We will make high-quality mental health services more available to Canadians who need them, including our veterans and first responders.
To eliminate systemic barriers and deliver equality of opportunity to all Canadians living with disabilities, we will consult with provinces, territories, and other stakeholders to introduce a National Disabilities Act.
FIGHTING POVERTY
We will also lift more Canadians – including children and seniors – out of poverty.
Poverty and inequality are not just problems for individual Canadians – all of Canada is affected.
For Canadians, poverty makes it more difficult to get and stay healthy, and more difficult to find and keep good work.
For Canada, the costs of poverty – seen in higher health care costs and greater demand for social assistance – are immense.
Our plan will lift Canadians out of poverty starting immediately after the next election.
We will introduce a new Canada Child Benefit.
Tax-free, tied to income and delivered monthly, this benefit provides greater support to those who need help most: single-parent families and low-income families.
It will lift 315,000 children out of poverty.
We will help to lift hundreds of thousands of seniors out of poverty by increasing the Guaranteed Income Supplement for single low-income seniors by ten percent.
This will give one million of our most vulnerable seniors – who are often women – almost $1,000 more each year.
And, as part of our new investment in social infrastructure, we will prioritize investments in affordable housing and seniors' facilities,
build more new housing units
and refurbish old ones,
give support to municipalities to maintain rent-geared-to-income subsidies in co-ops,
and give communities the money they need for Housing First initiatives that help homeless Canadians find stable housing.
INVESTING TO STRENGTHEN THE MIDDLE CLASS
Under Stephen Harper, Canada's economy has faltered, and our middle class now finds it harder and harder to make ends meet
It is time for smart, strategic investments that will turn our economy around and get it growing again.
Our plan will deliver the services we need,
create jobs,
and restore economic security to the middle class.
We will invest now in the projects our country needs and the people who can build them.
Interest rates are at historic lows, our current infrastructure is aging rapidly, and our economy is stuck in neutral.
Now is the time to invest.
We will run modest short-term deficits of less than $10 billion in each of the next two fiscal years to fund historic investments in infrastructure and our middle class.
After the next two fiscal years, the deficit will decline and our investment plan will return Canada to a balanced budget in 2019.
PUBLIC TRANSIT
We will invest in public transit to shorten commute times,
cut air pollution,
strengthen our communities,
and grow our economy.
Canadian cities have been growing at a rapid rate, but investment in public transit has not kept pace.
Stephen Harper's failure to invest has led to worsening traffic congestion, making it harder for families to spend time together
This gridlock also costs our economy billions of dollars in lost productivity each year.
We will get our communities moving again, by giving our provinces, territories, and municipalities the long-term, predictable federal funding they need to make transit plans a reality.
Over the next decade, we will quadruple federal investment in public transit, investing almost $20 billion more in transit infrastructure.
In communities all across Canada, transit projects are ready to go.
In British Columbia's Lower Mainland, for example, plans are in place to:  • increase SeaBus service to every ten minutes during morning and afternoon rushes;
extend rapid transit service along Broadway, currently the busiest bus corridor in North America;
and  • bring light rail transit to Surrey, one of the fastest growing parts of the region.
We will work with provinces and municipalities across the country to get projects like these done.
STRONGER COMMUNITIES
We will strengthen our communities by investing in the things that make them good places to live.
Investing in our communities is not just about creating good jobs and economic growth.
It is also about building communities that we are proud to call home.
With historic new investments in social infrastructure, we will achieve both.
We will improve quality of life for millions of Canadians by prioritizing investment in affordable housing,
seniors' facilities,
early learning and child care,
and cultural and recreational infrastructure.
We will also work with provinces, territories, and First Nations
to create a new National Early Learning and Child Care Framework, to ensure that affordable, high-quality, fully inclusive child care is available to all families who need it.
Over the next decade, we will invest almost $20 billion more in Canada's social infrastructure.
Toronto's Alexandra Park is an example of an urban community where investments in social infrastructure are already building a brighter future for its residents.
Aging community housing is being replaced with new affordable housing,
new commercial spaces,
and new parkland
– all helping to grow this vibrant neighbourhood and improve the quality of life for all who call it home.
With a federal partner at the table, stories like the revitalization of Alexandra Park can happen in communities all across Canada.
GREENER COMMUNITIES
We will invest in sustainable infrastructure that makes our communities safer and more resilient.
Responsible governments do not walk away from challenges, or pretend they do not exist.
We will protect our communities from the challenges of climate change and grow our economy by making significant new investments in green infrastructure.
This includes investments in local water and wastewater facilities;
clean energy;
climate resilient infrastructure, including flood mitigation systems;
and infrastructure to protect against changing weather.
We will boost investment in green infrastructure by nearly $6 billion over the next four years,
and almost $20 billion over ten years.
When it comes to infrastructure that will help keep Canadians safe and better prepared for emergencies, local leaders know what needs to be done.
What they need is a federal partner willing to invest to help build stronger, more resilient communities.
In St. John's, this means upgrades to its wastewater plant.
In Trois-Rivières, this means improving the Maples and Cardinal-Roy reservoirs,
and finding ways to mitigate the regular flooding of the Millette, Bettez, and Lacerte rivers.
In Calgary and Southern Alberta, this means investments in flood mitigation projects, to help protect local families and businesses.
NEW BUILDING CANADA FUND
We will make the New Building Canada Fund more focused
and more transparent.
The New Building Canada Fund is an important source of infrastructure funding for Canadian communities, but it has been hit by dramatic cuts and is heavily back-loaded, with more than 70 percent of its funding locked away until after 2019.
We will make the New Building Canada Fund more focused.
By providing significant, separate investments in public transit,
social infrastructure,
and green infrastructure,
we will enable the New Building Canada Fund to make greater investments in Canada's roads, bridges, transportation corridors, ports, and border gateways, helping Canada's manufacturers get their goods to market.
We will also make the fund more transparent, by providing clearer project criteria,
along with faster approval processes.
KEEPING OUR COMMITMENT TO COMMUNITIES
We will make sure that no money intended for investment in communities is allowed to lapse.
Too often, Stephen Harper budgeted funds for use in our communities, then let those dollars go unspent.
We will make sure our communities are not shortchanged.
Near the end of the fiscal year, we will automatically transfer any uncommitted federal infrastructure funds to municipalities, through a temporary top-up of the Gas Tax Fund.
This will ensure that no committed infrastructure money is allowed to lapse, but is instead always invested in our communities.
CANADA INFRASTRUCTURE BANK
We will establish the Canadian Infrastructure Bank to provide low-cost financing for new infrastructure projects.
The federal government can use its strong credit rating and lending authority to make it easier and more affordable for municipalities to build the projects their communities need.
Where a lack of capital represents a barrier to projects, the Canada Infrastructure Bank will provide loan guarantees and small capital contributions to provinces and municipalities to ensure that the projects are built.
JOB AND SKILLS TRAINING
We will help Canadians get the training they need to find and keep good jobs.
In a changing economy, Canadians need more opportunities to improve their skills and upgrade their credentials.
We will make it easier for adults to access training programs by increasing investment in skills training.
To help those receiving Employment Insurance get the training they need to rejoin the workforce, we will invest $500 million more each year in provincial and territorial Labour Market Development Agreements.
To help those who do not qualify for Employment Insurance or are not currently employed, we will invest an additional $200 million in training programs led by the provinces and territories.
We will also invest $50 million to renew and expand funding to the Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy,
and provide $25 million each year for training facilities, delivered in partnership with labour unions.
We will work with employers and workers to determine an appropriate apprenticeship ratio for all federal infrastructure projects.
Our total investment of an additional $775 million per year for job and skills training will help Canadians get the training they need to find and keep good jobs.
JOBS AND INNOVATION
We will kick-start investment in innovation to grow our economy and create good, middle class jobs.
To get our economy growing again, we need to immediately invest in helping our businesses and entrepreneurs – including those in manufacturing – become more innovative, competitive, and successful.
Over the next three years, we will:  invest $200 million each year in a new Innovation Agenda to significantly expand support for incubators and accelerators, as well as the emerging national network for business innovation and cluster support;
and   invest an additional $100 million each year in the Industrial Research Assistance Program, which has a proven track record of helping small- and medium-sized businesses to innovate and become world leaders.
AGRICULTURE
We will help Canada's agriculture sector be more innovative, safer, and stronger.
Canada's farmers and ranchers are the foundation of our food sector.
The work that they do to feed Canada and the world is vital, but government support is needed to help them with challenges ranging from transportation to water management to research and food safety.
To attract investment and create good jobs in food processing, we will invest $160 million, over four years, in an Agri-Food Value Added Investment Fund.
This will provide technical and marketing assistance to help food processors develop new value-added products that reflect changing tastes and market opportunities.
To support innovation in the agricultural sector, we will invest an additional $100 million, over four years, in agricultural research.
To better allocate research funding, we will establish a transparent process that involves food producers.
We will invest an additional $80 million, over four years, in the Canadian Food Inspection Agency for more food safety inspections of domestic and imported foods.
We will continue to defend Canadian interests during trade negotiations, including supply management.
We will also work with provinces, territories, and other willing partners,
to better address water and soil conservation and development issues, including investments in appropriate infrastructure.
LABOUR UNIONS
We will restore fair and balanced labour laws that acknowledge the important role of unions in Canada.
Labour unions play an important role in protecting the rights of workers and growing the middle class.
Under Stephen Harper, many of the fundamental labour rights that unions have worked so hard to secure have been rolled back, making it more difficult for workers to organize freely, bargain collectively in good faith, and work in safe environments.
We will restore fair and balanced labour laws that acknowledge the important role of unions in Canada,
and respect their importance in helping the middle class grow and prosper.
This begins with repealing Bills C-377 and C-525, legislation that diminishes and weakens Canada's labour movement.
Changes to labour laws should be based on evidence, not ideology, and made after legitimate consultation with unions.
We will reinstate a modernized and inclusive fair wages policy for federal procurement.
We are strongly committed to supporting and protecting workers' rights,
and as government, we will bargain in good faith with Canada's public sector unions.
LABOUR-SPONSORED FUNDS
We will reinstate the tax credit for contributions made to labour-sponsored funds, to help support economic growth and help Canadians save for their retirement.
In many parts of the country, labour-sponsored funds are used to help small- and medium-sized businesses get off the ground, creating jobs and economic growth.
In Quebec, they also serve as an important retirement savings vehicle.
There, labour-sponsored funds help 650,000 workers save for retirement,
while investing in Canada's entrepreneurs.
Even though we need to do more to encourage investment in new, job-creating businesses, and more to help Canadians save for their retirement, the Harper Convervatives are phasing out the tax credit for investments in labour-sponsored funds.
We will immediately reinstate the tax credit in full.
HELP THAT WORKS FOR MODERN CANADIAN FAMILIES
For most Canadians, balancing work and family life is a daily challenge.
As families change and adapt, so too should government.
It is time for programs and benefits that truly work for modern Canadian families.
MORE FLEXIBILITY FOR PARENTS
We will make parental benefits more flexible.
Every family's needs are different.
Canadian parents deserve a parental benefits plan that is flexible and able to adjust to their unique family and work circumstances.
We will introduce more flexible parental benefits that will:   allow parents to receive benefits in smaller blocks of time over a period of up to 18 months;
and   make it possible for parents to take a longer leave – up to 18 months when combined with maternity benefits – at a lower benefit level.
We will work with the provinces and territories to amend their labour codes, to reflect these new federal benefits.
This more flexible plan will benefit more Canadians, representing an investment of $125 million per year in the economic security of Canadian families.
SUPPORTING CAREGIVERS
We will make the compassionate care benefit easier to access, more flexible, and more inclusive.
Millions of Canadians provide compassionate care for seriously ill family members, but the benefits available through Employment Insurance can be difficult to access.
We will introduce a more flexible and inclusive benefit available to any Canadian who provides care to a seriously ill family member.
This expanded benefit will:  be easier to access – applicants will still be expected to submit a medical certificate in order to qualify, but the benefit will be more inclusive;
be more flexible – caregivers can claim the benefit in blocks of time over a year-long period, and family members can share the six months of benefits;
and  be more inclusive – for example, those caring for a seriously ill adult family member who needs care beyond what can be provided during evenings and weekends, or those caring for a seriously ill child who cannot attend school for an extended period of time, will no longer be excluded from the benefit.
This enhanced compassionate care benefit represents an investment of $190 million per year in supporting Canada's compassionate caregivers.
FLEXIBLE WORKING CONDITIONS
We will make it easier for federally regulated workers to request more flexible working conditions.
Every family struggles with balancing work responsibilities and busy lives at home.
Leading by example, we will amend the Canada Labour Code to provide every federally regulated worker with the legal right to make a formal request to their employer – without fear of reprisal – for more flexible working conditions, such as flexible start and finish times, or the ability to work from home.
Similar to the system in place in the United Kingdom, where the vast majority of requests have been approved, employers will be required to formally respond to these requests.
We will also work with interested provinces and territories so that they can offer the same rights to workers under their jurisdiction.
EMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
We will fix Employment Insurance to better serve Canadians now,
and help boost Canada's economic growth now and in the long-term.
Employment Insurance provides economic security to Canadians when they need it most.
Those who have lost their jobs, through no fault of their own, or are out of work to raise children, provide care for a loved one, or get needed skills training, should not struggle to get the support they need.
We will strengthen the Employment Insurance system to make sure that it works for our economy and for all Canadians.
Starting in 2017, we will reduce the waiting period for benefits.
When a worker loses their job and applies for Employment Insurance, they will only be without income for one week, not two.
We will also reverse Stephen Harper's 2012 EI reforms that force unemployed workers to move away from their communities and take lower-paying jobs.
We will ensure that the Employment Insurance system is providing real income security to workers, including those with precarious work.
CHILDCARE
We will develop a child care framework that meets the needs of Canadian families, wherever they live.
Child care needs vary from family to family, and provinces and territories have responded to these needs in different ways.
A one-size-fits all national program – particularly one that imposes pre-determined costs on other orders of government – is impractical and unfair.
We will meet with provinces, territories, and Indigenous communities to begin work on a new National Early Learning and Child Care Framework, to deliver affordable, high-quality, flexible, and fully inclusive child care for Canadian families.
This work will begin in the first 100 days of a Liberal government
and will be funded through our investments in social infrastructure.
The framework we design together will be administered in collaboration with, and in respect of, provincial jurisdictions.
HEALTHIER KIDS
We will do our part to help Canadian children live healthier lives, with less exposure to known health risks.
To help families make better food choices, we will:  introduce new restrictions on the commercial marketing of unhealthy food and beverages to children, similar to those now in place in Quebec;
bring in tougher regulations to eliminate trans fats, similar to those in the U.S.,
and to reduce salt in processed foods;
and  improve food labels to give more information on added sugars and artificial dyes in processed foods.
To help Canadian children avoid and manage known health risks, we will increase funding to the Public Health Agency of Canada by $15 million in each of the next two years, to support a national strategy to increase vaccination rates
and raise awareness for parents, coaches, and athletes on concussion treatment.
This will be based on the best science
and will support existing provincial and territorial efforts.
We will introduce plain packaging requirements for tobacco products, similar to those in Australia and the United Kingdom.
HELPING EDUCATORS
We will introduce a new tax benefit to help teachers and early childhood educators with the cost of school supplies.
Teachers and early childhood educators work hard to provide a positive learning environment for our children, often paying out-of-pocket for classroom supplies.
It is a generous gesture that is not currently recognized by our federal tax system.
To help offset these costs, we will introduce a new Teacher and Early Childhood Educator School Supply Tax Benefit.
This new benefit will apply to the purchase of up to $1,000 worth of school supplies each year, providing a cash benefit of up to $150 each year for licensed and certified teachers and educators, starting in the 2015 tax year.
Because this benefit will operate as a refundable tax credit, all educators who have purchased educational materials qualify, regardless of their income level.
CANADA'S NORTH
We will invest in Canada's North, to help northern Canadians with the high cost of living,
and help our northern economies grow.
Canada's North is a vast and beautiful part of the world, home to a rich culture and tremendous economic potential.
Because of its isolation, however, it is also a very expensive place to live.
The Northern Residents Deduction was designed to help mitigate these higher costs, and help attract workers to the North.
Unfortunately, the deduction amount has not kept pace with inflation, making its help less valuable to those who need it.
To help northern residents with higher costs of living, and to help our northern economies grow, we will increase the residency component of the deduction by 33 percent to a maximum of $22 per day.
We will also index this benefit so that it keeps pace with inflation.
To ensure that northern families have access to affordable, healthy food, we will increase investments in the Nutrition North program by $40 million, over four years.
We will also work with northern and remote communities to ensure that the program is more transparent, effective, and accountable to northerners and other Canadians.
As part of new, ten-year investments in social infrastructure and green infrastructure, we will prioritize investment in affordable housing
and climate change preparedness, both of which are important to the quality of life for northern Canadians.
For residents in Canada's Northern Zone, our enhanced Northern Residents Deduction will provide a new annual maximum deduction of $8,000 per year, from the $6,022 currently available.
Those living in the Intermediate Zone will see their annual maximum deduction rise to $4,000 from $3,011 per year.
In total, this enhanced deduction represents a $50 million annual tax savings for Northern Canadians.
CHAPTER TWO
FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT
OPEN AND TRANSPARENT GOVERNMENT
It is time to shine more light on government and ensure that it remains focused on the people it is meant to serve.
Government and its information should be open by default.
Data paid for by Canadians belongs to Canadians.
We will restore trust in our democracy, and that begins with trusting Canadians.
ACCESS TO INFORMATION
We will make government information more accessible.
Government data and information should be open by default, in formats that are modern and easy to use.
We will update the Access to Information Act to meet this standard.
We will make it easier for Canadians to access information by eliminating all fees, except for the initial $5 filing fee.
We will expand the role of the Information Commissioner, giving them the power to issue binding orders for disclosure.
We will ensure that Access to Information applies to the Prime Minister's and Ministers' Offices, as well as administrative institutions that support Parliament and the courts.
To ensure that the system continues to serve Canadians, we will undertake a full legislative review of the Access to Information Act every five years.
PERSONAL INFORMATION
We will make it easier for Canadians to access their own personal information.
Canadians have a right to access their personal information held by the government.
To make accessing this information faster, less complicated, and more affordable, we will create a simple, central, no-fee website for personal information requests.
We will back this up with a 30-day guarantee: should a request take longer than 30 days to fulfill, government must provide a written explanation for the delay to the applicant and the Privacy Commissioner.
OPEN DATA
We will embrace open data.
We will accelerate and expand open data initiatives,
and will make government data available digitally, so that Canadians can easily access and use it.
OPEN PARLIAMENT
We will disclose Parliamentary expenses
and make Parliament open by default.
The Liberal Party was the first to require its members to proactively disclose travel and hospitality expenses.
It is time for all Parliamentarians to do the same.
We will make government more accountable by requiring all Parliamentarians to disclose their expenses in a common and detailed manner, each quarter.
We will end the secrecy surrounding the Board of Internal Economy – the group responsible for regulating spending by Members of Parliament.
Except in rare cases requiring confidentiality, meetings of this group will be open to the public.
OPEN AND FAIR ELECTIONS
Restoring integrity to our electoral process will improve the fairness of our elections,
and help to renew Canadians' faith in government.
GOVERNMENT ADVERTISING
We will ban partisan government ads.
The federal government should use advertising to promote government programs, not partisan agendas.
We will appoint an Advertising Commissioner to help the Auditor General oversee government advertising.
The Commissioner will review proposed messages to ensure that they are non-partisan and represent a legitimate public service announcement.
We will protect the integrity of our elections
and encourage more Canadians to vote.
Fair elections are the cornerstone of democracy.
We will give Elections Canada the resources it needs to investigate voter fraud and vote suppression, illegal financing, and other threats to free and fair elections.
We will help encourage more Canadians to vote, by removing restrictions on the ways in which the Chief Electoral Officer and Elections Canada can communicate with voters.
Any incident of electoral fraud must be prosecuted.
To that end, we will restore the independence of the Commissioner of Canada Elections, so that they are accountable to Parliament and not the government of the day.
POLITICAL FINANCING
We will close political financing loopholes.
When fixed election date legislation was introduced, it left a loophole that allows unlimited spending in the period before an election is called.
That creates an uneven playing field.
We will review the limits on how much political parties can spend during elections,
and ensure that spending between elections is subject to limits as well.
LEADER'S DEBATE
We will establish an independent commission to organize leaders' debates.
Elections are a time for Canadians to learn more about political parties, their leaders, and their policies.
When it comes to leaders' debates, the focus should be on educating and engaging Canadians, not on twisting the rules for political advantage.
We will establish an independent commission to organize leaders' debates and bring an end to partisan gamesmanship.
ELECTORAL REFORM
We will make every vote count.
We are committed to ensuring that 2015 will be the last federal election conducted under the first-past-the-post voting system.
We will convene an all-party Parliamentary committee to review a wide variety of reforms, such as ranked ballots, proportional representation, mandatory voting, and online voting.
This committee will deliver its recommendations to Parliament.
Within 18 months of forming government, we will introduce legislation to enact electoral reform.
YOUNG CANADIANS
We will engage with first-time voters
and encourage more Canadians to vote.
Every young person should be registered to vote when they turn 18.
We will work with interested provinces and territories, and Elections Canada, to register young Canadians as a part of their high school or CEGEP curriculum.
To ensure that no young person loses the opportunity to vote, we will mandate Elections Canada to stay in contact with them if they change addressesafter graduation.
Finally, to encourage more voter participation, we will support Elections Canada in proactively registering Canadians from groups that historically have lower turnout, such as students.
EASIER VOTING, STRONGER PUNISHMENTS FOR LAW BREAKERS
We will make it easier for Canadians to vote,
and harder for election lawbreakers to evade punishment.
We will repeal the anti-democratic elements in Stephen Harper's Fair Elections Act, which make it harder for Canadians to vote and easier for election lawbreakers to evade punishment.
We will restore the voter identification card as an acceptable form of identification.
We will also increase penalties so that there are real deterrents for deliberately breaking our election laws.
GIVING CANADIANS A VOICE IN OTTAWA
For Parliament to work best, its members must be free to do what they have been elected to do: represent their communities and hold the government to account.
Government must always stay focused on serving Canadians and solving their problems.
SENATE REFORM
We will bring real change to the Senate.
The status quo is not an option: the Senate needs to change.
We need to end the partisan nature of the Senate.
We also believe that government should focus its efforts on the priorities of Canadians, not on more rounds of constitutional negotiations.
We will create a new, non-partisan, merit-based process to advise the Prime Minister on Senate appointments.
QUESTION PERIOD
We will reform Question Period so that all members, including the Prime Minister, are held to greater account.
As the head of government, the Prime Minister represents all Canadians and should be directly accountable to all Canadians.
We will introduce a Prime Minister's Question Period to improve that level of direct accountability.
We will also empower the Speaker to challenge and sanction members during Question Period, and allow more time for questions and answers.
We will look at other ways to make Question Period more relevant, including the use of online technologies,
and will work with all parties to recommend and bring about these changes.
FREE VOTES
We will make free votes in the House of Commons standard practice.
We will give Canadians a stronger voice in the House of Commons by limiting the circumstances in which Liberal Members of Parliament will be required to vote with Cabinet.
For members of the Liberal Caucus, all votes will be free votes with the exception of:  those that implement the Liberal electoral platform;
traditional confidence matters, like the budget;
and  those that address our shared values and the protections guaranteed by the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
PROROGATION AND OMNIBUS BILLS
We will not resort to legislative tricks to avoid scrutiny.
Stephen Harper has used prorogation to avoid difficult political circumstances.
We will not.
Stephen Harper has also used omnibus bills to prevent Parliament from properly reviewing and debating his proposals.
We will change the House of Commons Standing Orders to bring an end to this undemocratic practice.
GOVERNMENT WATCHDOGS
We will not interfere with the work of government watchdogs.
Our Officers of Parliament do important work in helping Canadians.
We will ensure that all of the officers are properly funded and accountable only to Parliament, not the government of the day.
SUPREME COURT APPOINTMENTS
We will make the Supreme Court appointment process more transparent.
Under Stephen Harper, the all-party Supreme Court appointment process has been disrespected and degraded, culminating in the Prime Minister's unprecedented attacks on the Chief Justice.
We will restore dignity and respect to the relationship between government and the Supreme Court.
We will work with all parties in the House of Commons to ensure that the process of appointing Supreme Court Justices is transparent, inclusive, and accountable to Canadians.
We will ensure that the process involves proper consultation with authorities throughout the legal profession, including the provinces, provincial law societies, provincial appellate and superior courts, and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
We will ensure that all those appointed to the Supreme Court are functionally bilingual.
PARLIAMENTARY BUDGET OFFICER
We will make the Parliamentary Budget Officer truly independent.
The decisions that government makes must always be based on the latest, most accurate information available.
That includes information about the state of the nation's finances.
To make sure that we have the best information on hand, we will ensure that the Parliamentary Budget Officer is truly independent of the government.
We will make sure that the office is properly funded, and accountable only – and directly – to Parliament, not the government of the day.
To help Canadians make informed decisions during elections, we will also add the costing of party platforms to the Parliamentary Budget Officer's mandate.
Starting with the next election, Canadians will have a credible, non-partisan way to compare each party's fiscal plans.
FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT
We will provide better oversight of taxpayer dollars.
Canadians understand the importance of saving, spending, and borrowing responsibly.
Our government should hold itself to the same standard.
We will change Parliament's financial processes so that government accounting is more consistent and clear.
We will ensure accounting consistency between the Estimates and the Public Accounts, provide costing analysis for all proposed legislation,
and require the government to receive Parliament's approval on borrowing plans.
NATIONAL SECURITY OVERSIGHT
We will deliver stronger national security oversight.
At present, Parliament does not have oversight of our national security agencies, making Canada the sole nation among our Five Eyes allies whose elected officials cannot scrutinize security operations.
This leaves the public uninformed and unrepresented on critical issues.
We will create an all-party committee to monitor and oversee the operations of every government department and agency with national security responsibilities.
PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEES
We will strengthen Parliamentary committees so that they can better scrutinize legislation.
Better government starts with better ideas.
We will ensure that Parliamentary committees are properly resourced to bring in expert witnesses,
and are sufficiently staffed to continue to provide reliable, non-partisan research.
To increase accountability, we will strengthen the role of Parliamentary committee chairs, including elections by secret ballot.
We will also change the rules so that Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries no longer have a vote on committees.
BETTER SERVICE FOR CANADIANS
In a digital era, Canadians have high standards for the service they receive.
Dealing with the government should be no exception.
Better service for Canadians would mean faster service, delivered in a way that makes citizens feel respected and valued.
CANADA REVENUE AGENCY
We will make the Canada Revenue Agency fairer, more helpful, and easier to use.
The Canada Revenue Agency exists to serve Canadians.
We will overhaul its service model so that people who interact with the CRA feel like valued clients, not just taxpayers.
A client-focused Canada Revenue Agency will:   proactively contact Canadians who are entitled to, but are not receiving, tax benefits;
offer to complete returns for some clients, particularly lower-income Canadians and those on fixed incomes whose financial situation is unchanged year-to-year;
support more Canadians who wish to file taxes using no paper forms;
and   deliver correspondence that is straightforward and easy to read.
We will allow charities to do their work on behalf of Canadians free from political harassment,
and will modernize the rules governing the charitable and not-for-profit sectors.
This will include clarifying the rules governing “political activity,” with an understanding that charities make an important contribution to public debate and public policy.
A new legislative framework to strengthen the sector will emerge from this process.
We will also invest an additional $80 million, over four years, to help the Canada Revenue Agency crack down on tax evaders.
CANADA POST
We will save home mail delivery.
By ending door-to-door mail delivery, Stephen Harper is asking Canadians to pay more for less service.
That is unacceptable.
We will stop Stephen Harper's plan to end door-to-door mail delivery in Canada
and undertake a new review of Canada Post to make sure that it provides high-quality service at a reasonable price to Canadians, no matter where they live.
DIVERSITY IN GOVERNMENT
We will build a government as diverse as Canada.
Our country is stronger, and our government more effective, when decision-makers reflect Canada's diversity.
We will include an equal number of women and men in our Cabinet.
We will also adopt a new government-wide appointment process that is open and based on merit.
YOUNG PEOPLE
We will involve young people in government.
At its highest levels, our government needs to do a better job of understanding and addressing the needs of Canada's young people.
We will create a Prime Minister's Youth Advisory Council, consisting of young Canadians aged 16 to 24, to provide non-partisan advice to the Prime Minister on issues facing the country.
GENDER IMPACT
We will consider the gender impacts of the decisions we make.
Public policies affect women and men in different ways.
We will take these differences into account when making decisions in Cabinet.
We will also ensure that federal departments are conducting the gender-based impact analyses that have been required of them for the past 20 years.
ONLINE SERVICES
We will deliver easy online access to government services.
Accessing government services online should be easier.
We will make the process easier and faster through individualized, secure accounts for Canadians who want to access their benefits and review key documents.
We will also create a single online point-of-contact for all government services,
and work with the provinces and territories on ways to combine online access.
As we expand online services, we will also expand in-person service, such as reopening the nine veterans' service centres closed by Stephen Harper.
Finally, we will work with the Privacy Commissioner as we develop these new initiatives, to ensure that Canadians' data is kept safe and secure.
QUALITY OF SERVICE
We will establish new performance standards for federal services.
Busy Canadians deserve better service from their government.
We will establish new performance standards, including streamlining applications, reducing wait times, and offering money-back guarantees.
Performance will be independently assessed and publicly reported.
We will start with the services hardest hit by years of cuts by Stephen Harper: Employment Insurance, veterans' services, immigration, and EI and CPP appeals.
We will also ensure that all federal services are delivered in full compliance with the Official Languages Act.
YOUR VOICE
We will involve Canadians in policy-making.
Technology makes it easier for citizens and government to share ideas and information.
We will explore new ways to use technology to crowdsource policy ideas from citizens.
EVIDENCE-BASED POLICY
Government should base its policies on facts, not make up facts to suit a preferred policy.
Common sense, good policy, and evidence about what works should guide the decisions that government makes.
SCIENCE AND SCIENTISTS
We will value science and treat scientists with respect.
We will appoint a Chief Science Officer who will ensure that government science is fully available to the public, that scientists are able to speak freely about their work,
and that scientific analyses are considered when the government makes decisions.
THE LONG-FORM CENSUS
We will restore the long-form census.
Without accurate and reliable data, Canada's communities cannot plan ahead.
Everything from transit planning to housing strategies to support for new Canadians becomes more difficult.
We will immediately restore the mandatory long-form census, to give communities the information they need to best serve Canadians.
STATISTICS CANADA
We will make Statistics Canada fully independent.
Data collected by Statistics Canada helps the private sector, government, not-for profit groups, and researchers make better decisions.
We will make Statistics Canada fully independent.
We will work with Statistics Canada and other stakeholders to provide a broader range of information, including detailed labour market information, child development data, and statistics about our population.
MAKING DECISIONS
We will make decisions using the best data available
and will invest only in programs proven to offer good value.
Responsible governments rely on sound data to make their decisions.
We will release to the public key information that informs the decisions we make.
We will devote a fixed percentage of program funds to experimenting with new approaches to existing problems.
We will measure our results
and encourage innovation to continuously improve the services government provides to Canadians.
We will use accurate data to make good decisions.
We will stop funding initiatives that are no longer effective and invest program dollars in those that are of good value.
CHAPTER THREE
A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT AND A STRONG ECONOMY
Canadians want a government they can trust to protect the environment
and grow the economy.
Stephen Harper has done neither.
Our plan will deliver the economic growth and jobs Canadians need,
and leave to our children and grandchildren a country even more beautiful, more sustainable, and more prosperous than the one we have now.
CLIMATE CHANGE
We will provide national leadership and join with the provinces and territories to take action on climate change,
put a price on carbon,
and reduce carbon pollution.
Climate change is an immediate and significant threat to our communities and our economy.
Stephen Harper has had nearly a decade to take action on climate change but has failed to do so.
His lack of leadership has tarnished Canada's reputation abroad, making it harder for Canadian businesses to compete.
The provinces and territories recognize the need to act now, and have already begun to price carbon and take action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
We will end the cycle of federal parties – of all stripes – setting arbitrary targets without a real federal/provincial/territorial plan in place.
We will instead partner with provincial and territorial leaders to develop real climate change solutions, consistent with our international obligations to protect the planet, all while growing our economy.
Together, we will attend the Paris climate conference,
and within 90 days formally meet to establish a pan-Canadian framework for combatting climate change.
We will work together to establish national emissions-reduction targets,
and ensure that the provinces and territories have targeted federal funding and the flexibility to design their own policies to meet these commitments, including their own carbon pricing policies.
These targets must recognise the economic cost and catastrophic impact that a greater-than-two-degree increase in average global temperatures would represent, as well as the need for Canada to do its part to prevent that from happening.
Partnering with the provinces and territories,
we will create a new Low Carbon Economy Trust.
The Trust will provide funding to projects that materially reduce carbon emissions under the new pan-Canadian framework.
We will endow the Low Carbon Economy Trust with $2 billion in our mandate.
We will protect our communities from the challenges of climate change
and grow our economy by making significant new investments in green infrastructure.
We will fulfill our G20 commitment and phase out subsidies for the fossil fuel industry over the medium-term.
We will also work in partnership with the United States and Mexico
to develop an ambitious North American clean energy and environmental agreement.
CLEAN JOBS
We will make it easier and more financially rewarding for Canadian businesses to invest in creating clean jobs.
Clean technology can deliver real benefits for our environment and our economy, including more good, middle class jobs.
We will invest $100 million more each year in clean technology producers, so that they can tackle Canada's most pressing environmental challenges, and create more opportunities for Canadian workers.
We will deliver more support to emerging clean tech manufacturing companies, making it easier for them to conduct research and bring new products to market.
We will also invest $200 million more each year to support innovation and the use of clean technologies in our natural resource sectors, including the forestry, fisheries, mining, energy, and agricultural sectors.
To support both large- and community-scale renewable energy projects, the new Canada Infrastructure Bank will issue Green Bonds to fund projects like electric vehicle charging stations and networks, transmission lines for renewable energy, building retrofits, and clean power storage.
We will enhance existing tax measures to generate more clean technology investments,
and work with the provinces and territories
to make Canada the world's most competitive tax jurisdiction for investments in the research, development, and manufacturing of clean technology.
We will deliver a better quality of life for all Canadians by working with the provinces
to set stronger air quality standards,
monitor emissions,
and provide incentives for investments that lead to cleaner air and healthier communities.
As the country's single largest employer, customer, and landlord, we will lead by example and increase government use of clean technologies.
This will boost domestic demand for clean technology, support entrepreneurs, and fuel new jobs.
We will improve energy efficiency standards for consumer and commercial products,
and use new financing instruments to encourage investments in energy-saving retrofits to Canada's industrial, commercial, and residential buildings.
We will provide more support for our clean technology companies to successfully export their products by training trade officials and leading trade missions focused on clean technology.
These companies will also be provided with useful training, data, and technical assistance on export opportunities in a more coordinated way.
We will look for ways for government to be an “early adopter” of emerging green technologies,
and will support clean transportation by adding electric vehicle charging stations at federal parking lots,
and rapidly expanding the federal fleet of electric vehicles.
To foster the creativity that leads to cutting-edge research, we will establish Canada Research Chairs in sustainable technology.
We will also work closely with the provinces and territories
to develop a Canadian Energy Strategy to protect Canada's energy security;
encourage energy conservation;
and bring cleaner, renewable energy onto the electricity grid.
Canada has lost 71% of its clean tech market share during the harper decade.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS
We will make environmental assessments credible again.
Resource-based projects can create jobs and spur investment, but success depends on regaining public trust.
Canadians must be able to trust that government will engage in appropriate regulatory oversight, including credible environmental assessments, and that it will respect the rights of those most affected, such as Indigenous communities.
While governments grant permits for resource development, only communities can grant permission.
We will immediately review Canada's environmental assessment processes
and introduce new, fair processes that will:  restore robust oversight and thorough environmental assessments of areas under federal jurisdiction,
while also working with provinces and territories to avoid duplication;
ensure that decisions are based on science, facts, and evidence, and serve the public's interest;
provide ways for Canadians to express their views and opportunities for experts to meaningfully participate;
and  require project advocates to choose the best technologies available to reduce environmental impacts.
We will modernize the National Energy Board, ensuring that its composition reflects regional views
and has sufficient expertise in fields like environmental science, community development, and Indigenous traditional knowledge.
We will end the practice of having federal Ministers interfere in the environmental assessment process.
We will also ensure that environmental assessments include an analysis of upstream impacts and greenhouse gas emissions resulting from projects under review.
We will undertake, in full partnership and consultation with First Nations, Inuit, and the Métis Nation, a full review of laws, policies, and operational practices.
This will ensure that on project reviews and assessments, the Crown is fully executing its consultation, accommodation, and consent obligations, in accordance with its constitutional and international human rights obligations,
including Aboriginal and Treaty rights and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
We recognize the relationship between Indigenous Peoples and the land,
and will respect legal traditions and perspectives on environmental stewardship.
Stephen Harper's changes to the Fisheries Act, and his elimination of the Navigable Waters Protection Act, have weakened environmental protections.
We will review these changes,
restore lost protections,
and incorporate more modern safeguards.
We will also do more to protect Canada's endangered species.
We will respond more quickly to the advice and requests of scientists,
and will complete robust species-at-risk recovery plans.
WATER
We will protect our freshwater and oceans.
Canada is uniquely blessed with an abundance of freshwater, and marine and coastal areas that are not only ecologically diverse, but also economically significant: our ocean-based industries contribute nearly $40 billion each year to the Canadian economy.
To protect these valuable natural resources, we will deliver more robust and credible environmental assessments for all projects that could impact our freshwater and oceans.
FRESHWATER
We will treat our freshwater as a precious resource that deserves protection and careful stewardship.
We will work with other orders of government
to protect Canada's freshwater using education, geo-mapping, watershed protection, and investments in the best wastewater treatment technologies.
To protect our freshwater ecosystems, we will renew our commitment to protect the Great Lakes, the St. Lawrence River Basin, and the Lake Winnipeg Basin.
We will also act on the recommendations of the Cohen Commission on restoring sockeye salmon stocks in the Fraser River.
To aid in making the best possible decisions, we will restore $1.5 million in annual federal funding for freshwater research
– a program that was cut by the Conservatives –
and make new investments in Canada's world-leading IISD Experimental Lakes Area.
OCEANS
Stephen Harper's failure to meet our international commitments to protect marine and coastal areas puts these areas and our international reputation at risk.
We will make up for Conservative inaction
and increase the amount of Canada's marine and coastal areas that are protected – to five percent by 2017,
and ten percent by 2020.
To help achieve this, we will invest $8 million per year in community consultation and science.
We will also directly invest in ocean science.
Stephen Harper cut $40 million from the federal ocean science and monitoring programs.
We will restore that funding so that we can protect the health of our fish stocks, monitor contaminants and pollution in our oceans, and support responsible and sustainable aquaculture industries on our coasts.
We will use scientific evidence and the precautionary principle, and take into account climate change, when making decisions affecting fish stocks and ecosystem management.
And we will do a better job of co-managing our oceans, by working with the provinces, territories, Indigenous Peoples, and other stakeholders.
Together, we will develop plans that make the best use of our marine resources
and give coastal communities more say in managing the resources around them.
NATIONAL PARKS
We will preserve and promote Canada's National Parks.
Canada's National Parks belong to all Canadians.
They are also an important part of local economies, generating nearly $5 billion each year and helping to employ 65,000 people.
We will make it more affordable for more Canadians to visit and appreciate our National Parks.
In 2017, the 150th anniversary of Confederation, admission for all visitors to National Parks will be free.
Beginning in 2018, admission for children under 18 will be free,
and any adult who has become a Canadian citizen in the previous 12 months will be given one year's free admission.
Through an expanded Learn to Camp program, more low- and middle-income families will have an opportunity to experience Canada's outdoors.
To protect ecosystems and species at risk, we will invest $25 million each year to develop Canada's National Parks system, as well as manage and expand National Wildlife Areas and Migratory Bird Sanctuaries.
We will protect our National Parks by limiting development within them,
and where possible, we will work with nearby communities to help grow local eco-tourism industries and create jobs.
We will reverse Stephen Harper's cuts to Parks Canada, which cut more than $25 million from programs and services, and made it more difficult for Canadians to experience our National Parks and learn more about our environment and our heritage.
We will work with the Ontario government
to create the country's first urban National Park – Rouge National Park – including improved legislation to protect this important ecosystem and guide how the park will be managed.
CHAPTER FOUR
A STRONG CANADA
A RENEWED RELATIONSHIP WITH INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
The relationship between Canada and Indigenous Peoples is vitally important – not just to our shared economic interests, but to our respective identities as nations.
It is time for a renewed relationship based on trust, respect, and a true spirit of cooperation.
A NEW NATION-TO-NATION PROCESS
We will renew the relationship between Canada and Indigenous Peoples.
It is time for Canada to have a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with Indigenous Peoples, based on recognition, rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership.
This is both the right thing to do and a sure path to economic growth
We will immediately re-engage in a renewed nation-to-nation process with Indigenous Peoples to make progress on the issues most important to First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit communities – issues like housing,
infrastructure,
health and mental health care,
community safety and policing,
child welfare,
and education.
As part of this renewed relationship, we will do more to make sure that the voices of Indigenous Peoples are heard in Ottawa.
As Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau will meet with First Nations, Métis Nation, and Inuit leaders each and every year of a Liberal government mandate.
Stephen Harper's changes to the Canada Elections Act make it harder for Indigenous Peoples to exercise their right to vote.
We will repeal those changes.
Finally, we will ensure that the Kelowna Accord – and the spirit of reconciliation that drove it – is embraced, and its objectives implemented in a manner that meets today's challenges.
A NEW FISCAL RELATIONSHIP
We will expand investment in First Nations communities
and work toward forging a new fiscal relationship with First Nations.
For nearly 20 years, investments in First Nations programs have been subject to a two percent cap on annual funding increases.
As a result, federal funding has not kept up with population growth and inflation in First Nations communities.
We will immediately lift the two percent cap on funding for First Nations programs and work to establish a new fiscal relationship that gives First Nations communities sufficient, predictable, and sustained funding.
Increasing First Nations' own source revenues, whether through revenue sharing or other mechanisms, will be a priority.
As part of this new fiscal relationship, we will also make sure that all First Nations receive equitable funding for child and family services provided on reserves.
FIRST NATIONS EDUCATION
We will work with First Nations to make sure that every First Nations child receives a quality education.
It is vital to Canadians' shared success that we work together to ensure better economic outcomes for First Nations.
This starts with education.
Chronic underfunding of the First Nations education system has held First Nations students back: they are behind provincial peers in reading, writing, and numeracy.
Today, less than half of students on reserves graduate from high school.
To help close the funding gap and improve outcomes for First Nations students, we will invest new funding each year in core funding for kindergarten through grade 12 programs.
This will include money committed by Stephen Harper that has yet to flow, plus an additional $300 million per year in incremental funding, totalling $750 million per year by the end of our first mandate.
Over the next four years, this represents a $2.6 billion new investment in helping First Nations students learn and succeed.
We will provide new funding to help Indigenous communities promote and preserve Indigenous languages and cultures.
We will also invest an additional $500 million over the next three years for building and refurbishing First Nations schools.
We will invest $50 million in additional annual funding to the Post-Secondary Student Support Program, which supports Indigenous students attending post-secondary education, ensuring the program will keep up with growing demand.
We believe that First Nations' control of First Nations education is vital to achieving improved outcomes,
and we will make these investments as part of a renewed, respectful, and inclusive nation-to-nation process that fully respects Aboriginal and Treaty rights.
MÉTIS NATION
We will work with the Métis Nation to improve the quality of life for Métis individuals and communities.
We will work, on a nation-to-nation basis, with the Métis Nation to advance reconciliation and renew the relationship, based on cooperation, respect for rights, our international obligations, and a commitment to end the status quo.
We will work with Métis people, as well as the provinces and territories, to establish a federal claims process that recognizes Métis self-government and resolves outstanding claims.
We will also make permanent the funding available to provincial Métis communities for Métis identification and registration, instead of it being available year-to-year.
We will review, in partnership with Métis communities, the existing federal programs and services available to the Métis Nation, to identify gaps and areas where strategic investments can be made to improve Métis quality of life.
To expand the economic opportunities for Métis, we will develop a Métis Economic Development Strategy in partnership with Métis communities and existing Métis financial institutions,
and will invest $25 million over five years to implement this new strategy.
MISSING AND MURDERED INDIGENOUS WOMEN AND GIRLS
We will immediately launch a national public inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada.
The disappearance and death of nearly 1,200 Indigenous women and girls is an ongoing national tragedy that must come to an end.
We will immediately launch a national public inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada, to seek recommendations on concrete actions that governments, law enforcement, and others can take to solve these crimes and prevent future ones.
TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION
We will enact the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
To support the work of reconciliation, and continue the necessary process of truth telling and healing, we will work alongside provinces and territories, and with First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit, to enact the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
starting with the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
THE FUTURE WE OWE OUR VETERANS
Veterans and their families have earned our respect and gratitude.
It is time our government lived up to its sacred obligation to them.
Our plan will give back to those who have given so much in service to all Canadians,
and will ensure that no veteran has to fight the government for the support and compensation they have earned.
VETERANS' PENSIONS
We will give veterans more compensation, more choice, and more support in planning their financial future.
We will re-establish lifelong pensions as an option for our injured veterans,
and increase the value of the disability award.
We will ensure that every injured veteran has access to financial advice and support so that they can determine the form of compensation that works best for them and their families.
To better support veterans who have had their career options limited by a service-related illness or injury, we will invest $25 million each year to expand access to the Permanent Impairment Allowance.
We will invest a further $40 million each year to provide injured veterans with 90 percent of their pre-release salary,
and will index this benefit so that it keeps pace with inflation.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING
We will honour the service of our veterans
and provide new career opportunities through a new Veterans Education Benefit.
Veterans have proven their ability to work hard and succeed, but many find it difficult to build new careers after their years of service.
To help veterans re-enter the workforce, and to help expand Canada's skilled labour force, we will invest $80 million every year to create a new Veterans Education Benefit.
This benefit will provide full support for the costs of up to four years of college, university, or technical education for Canadian Forces veterans after completion of service.
We will also expand the number of job opportunities available to veterans by ensuring provisions for their employment are included in the Community Benefits Agreements of federal infrastructure projects.
BETTER SERVICE
We will make it easier for veterans to access services, including mental health services.
We will deliver a higher standard of service and care,
and ensure that a “one veteran, one standard” approach is upheld.
To restore access to the support that veterans are due, we will re-open the nine Veterans Affairs service offices closed by Stephen Harper,
and will fully implement all of the Auditor General's recommendations on enhancing mental health service delivery to veterans.
We will hire 400 new service delivery staff, doubling the current planned increase.
This will include much-needed case managers at Veterans Affairs.
We will also immediately hire additional mental health professionals to give veterans the support they need.
Canada must be a world leader in caring for and supporting our veterans, and a Liberal government will budget $20 million to create two new centres of excellence in veterans' care, including one with a specialization in mental health, PTSD, and related issues for both veterans and first responders.
MORE SUPPORT FOR VETERANS' FAMILIES
We will do more to support the families of Canada's veterans.
Veterans have given years of their lives in service to Canada.
So have their families.
We will provide greater education, counselling, and training for families who are providing care and support to veterans living with physical and/or mental health issues as a result of their service.
We will also end the time limit for surviving spouses to apply for vocational rehabilitation and assistance services.
Our investment of $100 million each year will expand the circle of support for veterans' families.
So that surviving veterans' partners do not face a decline in quality of life with the loss of their loved one, we will increase the veteran survivor's pension amount from 50 percent to 70 percent.
We will also eliminate the “marriage after 60” clawback clause, so that surviving spouses of veterans receive appropriate pension and health benefits.
Veterans served Canada with honour and deserve to be treated with dignity when they pass away.
As our final act of respect, we will double funding to the Last Post Fund to ensure that all veterans receive a dignified burial.
KEEPING CANADIANS SAFE
Canada is fundamentally a safe and peaceful nation.
Our plan will keep Canadians safe and protect their rights,
without resorting to the politics of fear or letting ideology trump evidence in decision-making.
PREVENTING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT
We will give more support to survivors of domestic violence, sexual assault, and sexual harassment,
and ensure that more perpetrators are brought to justice.
For far too many Canadians – overwhelmingly women – sexual violence, sexual harassment, and intimate partner violence are real, and even daily, threats.
Many survivors choose not to report these incidents to police and conviction rates are low.
Working together with experts and advocates, we will develop and implement a comprehensive federal gender violence strategy and action plan, aligned with existing provincial strategies.
We will ensure that no one fleeing domestic violence is left without a place to turn.
We will increase investments in growing and maintaining Canada's network of shelters and transition houses, as part of our broader investment in social infrastructure.
We will amend the Criminal Code to reverse onus on bail for those with previous convictions of intimate partner violence.
We will also specify that intimate partner violence be considered an aggravating factor at sentencing,
and increase the maximum sentence for repeat offenders.
We will work in partnership with provinces and territories
to bolster public awareness campaigns,
and take action to ensure that Parliament and federal institutions – including the public service, the RCMP, and the Canadian Armed Forces – are workplaces free from harassment and sexual violence.
We will review current gender- and culturally-sensitive training policies for federal front-line law enforcement officers to ensure that they are strong and effective.
To help those who are new to Canada, we will change the rules so that spouses immigrating to Canada receive immediate permanent residency – rather than a two-year waiting period.
This will make it possible for spouses – most often women – to work and achieve financial independence.
We will also immediately launch a national public inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada.
BILL C-51
We will repeal the problematic elements of Bill C-51,
and introduce new legislation that better balances our collective security with our rights and freedoms.
Canadians know that in Canada, we can both improve our security while protecting our rights and freedoms.
We will introduce new legislation that will, among other measures:  guarantee that all Canadian Security Intelligence Service warrants respect the Charter of Rights and Freedoms;
establish an all-party national security oversight committee;
ensure that Canadians are not limited from lawful protests and advocacy;
require that government review all appeals by Canadians on the no-fly list;
narrow overly broad definitions, such as defining “terrorist propaganda” more clearly;
limit Communications Security Establishment's powers by requiring a warrant to engage in the surveillance of Canadians;
require a statutory review of the full Anti-Terrorism Act after three years;
and  prioritize community outreach and counter-radicalization, by creating the Office of the Community Outreach and Counter-radicalization Co-ordinator.
As this legislation is tabled in Parliament, we will launch broad public consultations, to engage and seek the input of Canadians and subject-matter experts.
GUNS
We will take action to get handguns and assault weapons off our streets.
Over the last decade, Stephen Harper has steadily weakened our gun laws in ways that make Canadians more vulnerable and communities more dangerous.
We will take pragmatic action to make it harder for criminals to get, and use, handguns and assault weapons.
We will:   repeal changes made by Bill C-42 that allow restricted and prohibited weapons to be freely transported without a permit,
and we will put decision-making about weapons restrictions back in the hands of police, not politicians;
provide $100 million each year to the provinces and territories
to support guns and gangs police task forces to take illegal guns off our streets and reduce gang violence;
modify the membership of the Canadian Firearms Advisory Committee to include knowledgeable law enforcement officers, public health advocates, representatives from women's groups, and members of the legal community;
require enhanced background checks for anyone seeking to purchase a handgun or other restricted firearm;
require purchasers of firearms to show a license when they buy a gun,
and require all sellers of firearms to confirm that the license is valid before completing the sale;
require firearms vendors to keep records of all firearms inventory and sales to assist police in investigating firearms trafficking and other gun crimes;
immediately implement the imported gun marking regulations that have been repeatedly delayed by Stephen Harper;
and  as part of our investment in border infrastructure, invest in technologies to enhance our border guards' ability to detect and halt illegal guns from the United States entering into Canada.
We will not create a new national long-gun registry to replace the one that has been dismantled.
We will ensure that Canada becomes a party to the international Arms Trade Treaty.
MARIJUANA
We will legalize,
regulate,
and restrict access to marijuana.
Canada's current system of marijuana prohibition does not work.
It does not prevent young people from using marijuana and too many Canadians end up with criminal records for possessing small amounts of the drug.
Arresting and prosecuting these offenses is expensive for our criminal justice system.
It traps too many Canadians in the criminal justice system for minor, non-violent offenses.
At the same time, the proceeds from the illegal drug trade support organized crime and greater threats to public safety, like human trafficking and hard drugs.
To ensure that we keep marijuana out of the hands of children, and the profits out of the hands of criminals, we will legalize,
regulate,
and restrict access to marijuana.
We will remove marijuana consumption and incidental possession from the Criminal Code,
and create new, stronger laws to punish more severely those who provide it to minors, those who operate a motor vehicle while under its influence, and those who sell it outside of the new regulatory framework.
We will create a federal/provincial/territorial task force,
and with input from experts in public health, substance abuse, and law enforcement, will design a new system of strict marijuana sales and distribution, with appropriate federal and provincial excise taxes applied.
INVESTING IN OUR CULTURAL AND CREATIVE INDUSTRIES
Canada's stories, shaped by our immense diversity, deserve to be celebrated and shared.
Our plan will protect our important national institutions,
safeguard our official languages,
promote the industries that reflect our unique identity as Canadians,
and provide jobs and economic opportunities.
CBC/RADIO-CANADA
We will reverse Stephen Harper's cuts
and make new investments to support our national broadcaster.
As the anchor to our cultural and creative industries, CBC/Radio-Canada is a vital national institution that brings Canadians together, promotes and defends our two official languages, and supports our shared culture.
By severely cutting its budget, Stephen Harper has jeopardized our national broadcaster's ability to do this important work.
We will protect the interests of our national broadcaster, in the interests of all Canadians.
We will reverse Stephen Harper's cuts
and invest $150 million in new annual funding for CBC/Radio-Canada, to be delivered in consultation with the broadcaster and the Canadian cultural community.
We will review the process by which members are appointed to the CBC/Radio-Canada Board of Directors, to ensure merit-based and independent appointments.
CULTURAL AND CREATIVE INDUSTRIES
We will invest in our cultural and creative industries to create jobs and grow the middle class, and to strengthen our rich Canadian identity.
Canada's cultural and creative industries are a vibrant part of our national identity and our economy, providing employment to more than one million Canadians.
Unfortunately, these industries have been under attack during the Harper decade, hit by funding cuts that have made it harder for Canadian artists to share Canadian stories, here in Canada and around the world.
We will invest in our cultural and creative industries to help support and grow these nation-building efforts.
Targeted investments will include:  doubling investment in the Canada Council for the Arts to $360 million each year;
increasing funding for Telefilm Canada and the National Film Board, with a new investment totalling $25 million each year;
and  restoring the Promart and Trade Routes international cultural promotion programs cut by Stephen Harper,
and increasing funding in these programs to $25 milllion each year.
As part of our commitment to create 40,000 youth jobs each year, we will increase funding for the Young Canada Works program to help prepare the next generation of Canadians working in the heritage sector.
We will also make significant new investments in cultural infrastructure as part of our investment in social infrastructure.
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
We will encourage and promote the use of Canada's official languages.
Canada's diversity is its strength.
That includes our proud tradition of official bilingualism.
Stephen Harper ignores this diversity by appointing unilingual Anglophones to important positions ranging from the Auditor General to Supreme Court Justices.
We will renew the federal government's commitment to our official languages by:  developing a new official languages plan to support English and French linguistic minorities;
ensuring that all federal services be delivered in full compliance with the Official Languages Act;
establishing a free, online service for learning and retaining English and French as second languages;
reinstating the Court Challenges Program of Canada cut by Stephen Harper;
and  making new investments to support CBC/Radio-Canada, a vital national institution that brings Canadians together, promotes and defends our two official languages, and supports our shared culture.
SUPPORTING STRONG COMMUNITIES
Canada's economic success comes from its strong communities, and the exceptional people who live, work, and serve in them every day.
When we support those who make our communities great places to live, we all benefit.
COMMUNITY HEROES
We will offer greater financial security to the families of disabled or deceased public safety officers,
and deliver a new plan to address PTSD.
We ask public safety officers to stand in harm's way to protect Canadians and keep us safe, and they deserve the highest level of support and care when the unthinkable happens.
We will introduce a public safety officer compensation benefit to be paid to the families of fire fighters, police officers, and paramedics killed or permanently disabled in the line of duty.
This $300,000 benefit will offer a measure of financial security to families who are struggling with permanently changed life circumstances or the loss of a loved one.
When it comes to post-traumatic stress disorder, the kind of support that a first responder receives should be based on their need, not on where they live.
We will work with the provinces and territories
to develop a coordinated national action plan on post-traumatic stress disorder, which disproportionately affects public safety officers.
SEARCH AND RESCUE
We will restore funding for Canada's four heavy urban search and rescue teams.
Being able to respond swiftly and effectively to emergencies like ice storms, floods, wildfires, and building collapses is in our national interest.
In the past, Canada's four heavy urban search and rescue teams have proven invaluable in keeping Canadians and communities safe.
Under Stephen Harper, funding for these teams has been eliminated, putting our national response capabilities in jeopardy.
To protect Canadians, our oceans, and our coastal economies, we will also re-open the Maritime Rescue Sub-centre in St. John's,
and the Kitsilano Coast Guard Base in Vancouver, which were closed by Stephen Harper.
CHAPTER FIVE
SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY
OPENING THE DOOR TO PROSPERITY
Canada's story is the story of immigration.
Those who choose to make Canada their new home bring with them their unique cultures, languages, and an entrepreneurial spirit that strengthens our economy.
We need a new plan for our immigration system that is grounded in compassion and economic opportunity for all.
REUNITING FAMILIES
We will make it easier for immigrants to build successful lives in Canada, and contribute to the economic success of all Canadians.
Immigration has always been an important part of Canada's economic growth,
but over the past decade, Stephen Harper has turned his back on welcoming those who want to contribute to our country's success.
We will take immediate steps to reopen Canada's doors,
and will make reuniting families a top priority.
We will immediately double the number of applications allowed for parents and grandparents, to 10,000 each year.
We will also nearly double the budget for processing family class sponsorship.
Wait times will come down – which currently average almost four years for parent and grandparent applications.
We will provide more opportunities for applicants who have Canadian siblings by giving additional points under the Express Entry system,
and we will restore the maximum age for dependents to 22 from 19, to allow more Canadians to bring their children to Canada.
We will also grant immediate permanent residency to new spouses entering Canada, eliminating the two-year waiting period.
INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND TEMPORARY RESIDENTS
We will give international students and temporary residents credit for time already spent in Canada.
We will make it easier for international students and other temporary residents to become Canadian citizens by restoring the residency time credit.
We will also make changes to the Canadian Experience Class, to reduce the barriers to immigration imposed on international students.
REMITTANCES
We will make it more affordable for Canadian workers to send money overseas.
We will work with provincial and territorial governments
to better regulate the remittance industry, so that residents of Canada who send money overseas to help family members are not gouged by high fees.
This will include working with Canada's banks to ensure low-cost access to transfer services,
exploring ways for Canada Post to offer remittance services,
and imposing tough new penalties on those who abuse the system and take advantage of vulnerable newcomers to Canada.
HIRING CAREGIVERS
We will make it easier and more affordable to hire caregivers.
Canadian families looking for caregivers to help family members with physical or mental disabilities must pay a $1,000 Labour Market Impact Assessment fee.
We will eliminate that fee.
We will also work with the provinces and territories
to develop a system of regulated companies to hire caregivers on behalf of families.
This will make it simpler for families to hire caregivers,
and protect caregivers by allowing them to change employers in the case of bad relations or abuse.
A MORE COMPASSIONATE CANADA
Canadians are open, accepting, and generous – qualities that should be reflected in Canada's response to those seeking refuge from conflict and war.
Our communities are strengthened when we come together to help those in need.
Canada's government should do the same.
SYRIAN REFUGEES
We will welcome more refugees from Syria to Canada,
and offer more help to those providing aid in the region.
Canadians have been deeply moved by the suffering of refugees in Syria and the surrounding region.
Canada has a strong history of helping those in need, from Hungarian refugees in the 1950s to Ismaili Muslim refugees in the 1970s to those fleeing South East Asia by boat in the 1970s and 1980s.
Many Canadians have already offered to help those fleeing Syria, and it is time for the federal government to offer more help, too.
We have a responsibility to expand our refugee targets and give more victims of war a safe haven in Canada.
To that end, we will expand Canada's intake of refugees from Syria by 25,000 through immediate government sponsorship.
We will also work with private sponsors to accept even more.
To do this, we will invest $250 million, including $100 million this fiscal year, to increase refugee processing, as well as sponsorship and settlement services capacity in Canada.
We will also provide a new contribution of $100 million this fiscal year to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees to support critical relief activities in the region.
REFUGEES
We will restore Canada's reputation
and help more people in need through a program that is safe, secure, and humane.
Canada once welcomed refugees openly, but that proud history has faded after a decade of mismanagement under Stephen Harper.
We will renew and expand our commitment to helping resettle more refugees,
and deliver a refugee program that is safe, secure, and humane.
We will:  fully restore the Interim Federal Health Program that provides limited and temporary health benefits to refugees and refugee claimants;
establish an expert human rights panel to determine designated countries of origin,
and provide a right to appeal refugee decisions for citizens from these countries;
and  appoint individuals with appropriate subject-matter expertise to Canada's Immigration and Refugee Board.
HELP FOR THE WORLD'S POOR
We will refocus our development assistance on helping the poorest and most vulnerable.
Over the past ten years, Stephen Harper has steadily shifted aid away from the world's poorest countries, particularly in Africa.
We will consult with Canadian and international aid organizations to review current policies and funding frameworks that will refocus our aid priorities on poverty reduction.
As part of rebalancing our priorities, we will ensure that every dollar committed to international development actually gets spent.
We will not allow funds to lapse, as Stephen Harper has done.
We will also ensure that Canada's valuable aid initiative on Maternal, Newborn and Child Health (MNCH) is driven by evidence and outcomes, not ideology.
Closing existing gaps in reproductive rights and health care can and will save lives.
We will cover the full range of reproductive health services as part of MNCH initiatives.
EXPANDING EXPORTS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR CANADIANS
Canada's economic success relies on strong trade relationships with our closest neighbours: the United States and Mexico.
Unlike the Conservatives' short-sighted approach, our focus on rebuilding relationships will build a solid foundation for greater trade, stronger growth, and more job creation.
THE UNITED STATES AND MEXICO
We will renew and repair our relationships with our North American partners.
For the past decade, Stephen Harper has led a government that is increasingly partisan, suspicious, and hostile when dealing with our closest neighbours: the United States and Mexico.
We will end this antagonism and work with our partners to advance our shared interests.
As a first step, we will immediately lift the Mexican visa requirement that unfairly restricts travel to Canada,
and commit to rescheduling and hosting a new trilateral leaders' summit with the United States and Mexico.
We will work with the United States and Mexico to develop a continent-wide clean energy and environment agreement.
Because Canada relies on international trade to create jobs and grow our economy, we will work to reduce the barriers that limit trade.
With a re-focused Building Canada Fund, we will promote a steadier flow of goods and business travellers by modernizing border infrastructure and streamlining cargo inspections.
To underscore the importance of the United States to Canada, we will also create a Cabinet committee to oversee and manage our relationship.
GETTING CANADIAN GOODS TO MARKET
We will expand export opportunities that benefit Canada.
Trade is vital for our economy.
It opens markets, grows Canadian businesses, and creates good-paying middle class jobs – jobs that pay wages that are 50 percent higher than industries that are not export intensive.
That is good news for the middle class and the communities they call home.
Stephen Harper's approach to trade, however, has failed.
His Conservative government has recorded the largest trade deficit in Canadian history, and Canadians are paying the price in lost job opportunities.
While Stephen Harper may sign trade deals, he walks away from partnering with businesses and entrepreneurs to ensure they can succeed in new markets and create wealth and jobs for Canadians.
Properly negotiated and implemented, free trade agreements are good for the Canadian economy.
We will carefully consider all trade opportunities currently open to Canada,
and explore deeper trade relationships with emerging and established markets, including China and India.
We will develop a new export promotion strategy that will help businesses take advantage of new trade agreements.
RENEWING CANADA'S PLACE IN THE WORLD AND STRENGTHENING OUR SECURITY
Canada's future security and prosperity go hand-in-hand.
Our plan will ensure that Canada's Armed Forces have the equipment they need and the support they require to protect our sovereignty and support peace operations, while also growing local economies and creating jobs.
CANADA'S LEADERSHIP IN THE WORLD
We will restore Canadian leadership in the world.
Canada has a proud tradition of international leadership, from helping to create the United Nations after the Second World War, to the campaign against South African apartheid, to the international treaty to ban landmines.
Unfortunately, under Stephen Harper, our influence and presence on the world stage has steadily diminished.
Instead of working with other countries constructively at the United Nations, the Harper Conservatives have turned their backs on the UN and other multilateral institutions, while also weakening Canada's military, our diplomatic service, and our development programs.
Whether confronting climate change, terrorism and radicalization, or international conflicts, the need for effective Canadian diplomacy has never been greater than it is today.
Our plan will restore Canada as a leader in the world.
Not only to provide greater security and economic growth for Canadians, but because Canada can make a real and valuable contribution to a more peaceful and prosperous world.
PROMOTING INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
We will renew Canada's commitment to peacekeeping operations.
Under Stephen Harper, Canada has dramatically scaled back its involvement in peace operations – a decision that could not come at a worse time.
As the number of violent conflicts in the world escalates, demand for international peace operations has never been greater.
Peace operations are important not only because of the help they provide to millions of people affected by conflicts, but also because they serve Canada's interests.
A more peaceful world is a safer and more prosperous world for Canada, too.
We will recommit to supporting international peace operations with the United Nations,
and will make our specialized capabilities – from mobile medical teams to engineering support to aircraft that can carry supplies and personnel – available on a case-by-case basis.
To help the UN respond more quickly to emerging and escalating conflicts, we will provide well-trained personnel that can be quickly deployed, including mission commanders, staff officers, and headquarters units.
We will prioritize assistance for civilian police training operations, particularly Francophone officers, who are in great demand in French-speaking countries with peace operations.
We will lead an international effort to improve and expand the training of military and civilian personnel deployed on peace operations,
and will insist that any peacekeepers involved in misconduct be held accountable by their own country and the United Nations.
Finally, to better help those affected by war and violent conflict, we will contribute more to the United Nations' mediation, conflict-prevention, and post-conflict reconstruction efforts.
INVESTING IN OUR MILITARY
We will maintain current National Defence spending levels, including current planned increases.
Under Stephen Harper, investments in the Canadian Armed Forces have been erratic, promised increases in funding have been scaled back, and more than $10 billion of approved funding was left unspent.
This mismanagement has left Canada's Armed Forces underfunded and ill-equipped, and the courageous members of the Forces unsupported after years of dedicated service.
We will not let Canada's Armed Forces be shortchanged,
and we will not lapse military spending from year to year.
We will also reinvest in building a leaner, more agile, better-equipped military, including adequate support systems for military personnel and their families.
F-35
We will not buy the F-35 stealth fighter-bomber.
We will immediately launch an open and transparent competition to replace the CF-18 fighter aircraft.
The primary mission of our fighter aircraft should remain the defence of North America, not stealth first-strike capability.
We will reduce the procurement budget for replacing the CF-18s,
and will instead purchase one of the many, lower-priced options that better match Canada's defence needs.
ROYAL CANADIAN NAVY
We will make investing in the Royal Canadian Navy a top priority.
By purchasing more affordable alternatives to the F-35s, we will be able to invest in strengthening our Navy, while also meeting the commitments that were made as part of the National Shipbuilding and Procurement Strategy.
Unlike Stephen Harper, we will have the funds that we need to build promised icebreakers,
supply ships, arctic and offshore patrol ships, surface combatants, and other resources required by the Navy.
These investments will ensure that the Royal Canadian Navy is able to operate as a true blue-water maritime force, while also growing our economy and creating jobs.
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
We will immediately begin an open and transparent review process of existing defence capabilities, with the goal of delivering a more effective, better-equipped military.
The Canada First Defence Strategy, launched by Stephen Harper in 2008, is underfunded and out of date.
We will review current programs and capabilities, and lay out a realistic plan to strengthen Canada's Armed Forces.
We will develop the Canadian Armed Forces into an agile, responsive, and well-equipped military force that can effectively defend Canada and North America;
provide support during natural disasters, humanitarian support missions, and peace operations
and offer international deterrence and combat capability.
We will continue to work with the United States to defend North America under NORAD,
and contribute to regional security within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
We will ensure that equipment is acquired faster, and with vigorous Parliamentary oversight.
We will put a renewed focus on surveillance and control of Canadian territory and approaches, particularly our Arctic regions,
and will increase the size of the Canadian Rangers.
We will continue to support international peace and security operations, as well as humanitarian support missions with the United Nations or regional partners, on a case-by-case basis.
We will assist in domestic security and natural disaster responses, both at home and abroad.
To help regional and local partners prevent the spread of terrorism and radicalization, we will vastly increase the scope of training assistance missions.
To bolster these partnerships, we will support programs that admit and train partner country military students.
We will conduct a thorough review of existing measures to protect Canadians and our critical infrastructure from cyber-threats.
Most importantly, we will protect the well-being of Canadian Armed Forces members while in service, including a zero-tolerance policy for sexual harassment,
adequate mental health support services,
and high-quality career counselling and support.
We will also make new and significant investments to meet the sacred obligation that we have to our veterans.
REPORT ON TRANSFORMATION
We will implement the recommendations made in the Canadian Forces' Report on Transformation.
The Canadian Armed Forces' ability to protect Canada's borders and work with our allies overseas should never be compromised.
Threats to its ability to meet future obligations must be addressed head on.
The Report on Transformation made a series of recommendations on how to build a more modern, efficient, and effective military, including reducing the size of administration within government and the Canadian Armed Forces in order to strengthen front-line operations.
COMBAT MISSION IN IRAQ
We will end Canada's combat mission in Iraq.
We will refocus Canada's military contribution in the region on the training of local forces,
while providing more humanitarian support
and immediately welcoming 25,000 more refugees from Syria.
CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE
We will remain fully committed to Canada's existing military contributions in Central and Eastern Europe.
This includes Canada's participation in NATO assurance measures in Central and Eastern Europe (Operation REASSURANCE) and the multinational training mission in Ukraine (Operation UNIFIER).
