ACTION ON GLOBAL WARMING
There is no escaping our economic future.
It is clean and green or it is no future at all.
Global warming puts our health, our economy and our precious places at risk, and we need to act.
Our plan for action on global warming will help us to move from our fossil fuel dependence and into clean energy while attracting new businesses and jobs.
The Greens are the only party with the courage to tackle catastrophic global warming & transition Australia away from coal towards a clean energy economy.
We can embrace the next wave of technologies to help reduce our reliance on coal and gas fired power.
We need to build an energy system fit for the 21st century, and transition away from the polluting industries of the past, while ensuring that workers, families and communities are not left behind.
We’re already feeling severe impacts including devastating coral bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef and we need to prepare and adapt in order to save lives and protect communities.
Through our comprehensive plan for climate adaptation, we can build greater resilience to disasters, and ensure frontline services have the resources they need to support our communities.
Our plan for action on global warming includes a commitment to:Create a new clean energy economy with at least 90% renewables by 2030, through our Renew Australia plan
Support Australians to repower their homes and businesses with clean energy, through community owned renewable energy, access to solar energy, and revolutionising our energysystem through battery storage
Invest in clean transport that works for people and our environment
Fund disaster preparedness and frontline services to address the global warming impacts that we are already facing
Keep coal in the ground, whilst ensuring that workers and communities are able to adjust to the transition as our coal usage and exports gradually decline
RENEWAUSTRALIA
We are currently heading towards a climate catastrophe.
Our planet is warming, sea levels are rising, we are living through hotter summers and more extreme weather events.
Our past relied on coal fired power, but coal can no longer secure us a prosperous and safe future.
It makes economic sense to act now.
The coal industry is in structural decline.
Coal exports aren declining and the world is shifting towards cleanenergy.
As one of the sunniest and windiest countries in the world, Australia can lead the transition to a clean energy powered future.
To avoid catastrophic global warming and stabilise warming below 1.5 degrees, Australia must cut pollution rapidly to achieve net zeropollution by 2040
The Australian Greens have ,a strategy to get there, and our plan for atleast 90 per cent clean energy by 2030 is a critical component.
Our plan to power the new economy includes a commitment to:Ensure that energy generation is at least 90% renewable by 2030 and our energyefficiency is doubled
Establish a new $500 million (over 5 years) government authority – RenewAustralia – tasked with planning and driving the transitionto a new clean energy system to leverage $5 billion of construction in new energy generation over the next four years
Create a $1 billion (over 15 years) Clean Energy Transition Fund to assist coal workers and communities with the transition
•Implement pollution intensity standards to enable the gradual, staged closure of coal fired power stations, starting with Australia’s dirtiest — Hazelwood.
WE’RE UP TO THE CHALLENGE
The Greens have a proven track record when it comes to tackling global warming and creating a clean economy.
We delivered in the last Parliament in spades when we negotiated, in the words of the International Energy Agency, model climate legislation that delivered $13 billion to clean energy through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency and the Clean Energy Finance Corporation and, of course, a price on pollution.
REPOWERING OUR COMMUNITIES
Australians love clean energy, and we all want to do our bit to tackle global warming.
The Greens have a vision for every Australian to be able to power their own home or business using the clean energy they generate themselves.
While the old parties hold on to the dirty, polluting industries of the past; the Greens have  a plan to take the power from the big polluters and give it back to the community.
With support for community owned renewable energy, battery storage and solar energy, we can transition to a clean energy future
This suite of measures is aimed at breaking down all the barriers that prevent businesses and households from installing clean energy and using it as efficiently as possible.
We want to help consumers take power away from big energy companies and democratize our energy system.
Our plan to repower our communitiesincludes a commitment to:Power our community with community owned renewable energy by incentivizing investment in community clean energyprojects through tax breaks
establish a $150 million start-up fund to get 50 Community Energy powerhouses up and running with up to two years of operational funding.
•The Greens will expand and support the Solar Communities Program with funding of $102.9 million
Help Australian households and businesses to take control of their power, reduce their bills, and create more solar jobs through a $5 million information campaign to promote the Clean Energy Finance Corporation’s schemes to support solar installation in households and businesses
Help 1.2 million homes get battery storage by introducing a 50 per cent refundable tax credit for individuals to assist with the cost of household solar energy storage systems and introducing a grant for low income households
ensuring a fair price for solar
A national program for schools to invest in clean energy
establishing a Solar Ombudsman  to facilitate a 'right to solar' for renters
Changing legislation to increase access to solar energy and modernise our energy system
A nationwide retrofit of Australia’s public and community housing stock of 421,000 dwellings by 2030 with rooftop solar and energy efficiency to make them cheaper to run and more comfortable to live in
BUILDING OUR CLEAN TRANSPORT FUTURE
People spend too much time stuck in traffic.
It’s bad for people and bad for the planet
We urgently need to reduce our reliance on coal, gas and oil in fuelling how we get around and cut our transport-related pollution.
A world-class public transport system will fix traffic congestion and make our economy more productive
Instead of polluting toll roads, the Greens will invest $25 billion over ten years for public transport infrastructure, low pollution buses and light rail.
In addition, the Greens are committed to investment in cycling and walking infrastructure as a smart, cost-effective way to reduce traffic congestion and pollution.
We’re also driving the transition from petroleum to electric vehicles, by providing incentives for Australian consumers, businesses and government to take up clean electric vehicle technologies.
Our plan to build our clean energy future will make our cities and towns more liveable, and reduce pollution that is bad for our health and our climate.
The Greens have a plan to build our clean transport future that would:Put public transport first through investing $25 billion over 10 years into a range of efficient public transport projects as first priority, before more urban mega-roads.
This investment is sourced via the Greens’ Australian Infrastructure Bank, which will manage financing of these investments
Establish an Active Transport Fund worth $250 million annually for cycling and walking infrastructure
Reduce road trauma by committing $300 million in additional funding for the Black Spot road safety program
Help to get 31,000 more electric vehicles on the road by 2021 and 3,500 more charging stations around the country through a suite of initiatives that will accelerate the take up of electric vehicle technology around Australia
Fast-track high-speed rail to ensure more Australians can access reliable public transport
LIVING WITH GLOBAL WARMING
Australia is the driest inhabited continent on earth with huge coastal cities.
We must urgently cut climate pollution, but some dangers are now inevitable.
Even if the world makes rapid cuts in pollution, extreme weather, floods, fires and other natural disasters are projected to increase with global warming.
We are already feeling the impacts of global warming.
This year, 2016, is set to be the hottest on record, breaking the records set in 2014 and again in 2015.
With just one degree of warming, we already have mass bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef, and swathes of Tasmania’s ancient wilderness have burned out of control.
We have the tools to fix this crisis and there are immense opportunities in jobs-rich clean energy, but some impacts are already unavoidable.
The Greens have a plan to adapt to the impacts which are already ‘locked in’, understanding our communities and infrastructure need to be resilient and prepared.
The Greens’ plan to better protect and prepare the Australian community includes a commitment to: Double the number of paid firefighters in both urban and rural areas by 2030 with an initial $120 million over the first four years.
Fund natural disaster preparedness such as disaster proofing infrastructure,
building resilience and supporting rural fire services and the SES
Secure the future of climate change adaptation research by funding the National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility with a five-year, $50 million commitment
Plan for rising seas, by supporting state and local governments to invest in strategies to address inevitable sea level rise
THE END OF COAL
The climate can’t take any more new coal or gas.
The mining and burning of coal is driving dangerous globalwarming which threatens to kill our precious places like the Great Barrier Reef, and the 69,000 jobs it supports.
Around 90 per cent of the coal we dig up is exported – roughly 1 billion tonnes of Reefwrecking pollution, which is double Australia’s domestic pollution levels.
Our Great Barrier Reef and our food producing land shouldn’t be subjected to any new coal or gas mines or expansions when we have abundant clean energy that is reliable, creates more jobs and won’t worsen global warming.
The dirty energy industry is in freefall and we need to prepare now for the inevitable transition.
The Greens want to ensure a bright future for currently coal dependent communities and our environment, by making sure coal companies pay for the damage they are doing.
That money can be reinvested into clean energy projects, climate adaptation and our precious places like the Reef, and create new, long-term jobs.
To manage the transition away from coal, the Greens plan includes a commitment to:Say no to new coal or gas – the dirty energy industry is in freefall and we need
Create a $1 billion (over 15 Years) Clean Energy Transition Fund help workers and communities adjust to transition
Re-implement a price on carbon, with coal and gas exporters paying the full cost of the greenhouse gases that leak from mining operations
Stop giving miners tax-free fuel, while the rest of us pay 39¢ a litre – this would save the government $6 billion a year in subsidies
Secure jobs in mine rehabilitation before the big mining companies flee overseas and leave workers in the lurch by conducting an audit of rehabilitation costs and collecting money up-front
A CONFIDENT AUSTRALIA
Australia is a prosperous country with a proud tradition of a fair go.
We are a generous and caring nation.
We can welcome people seeking asylum who will help build our communities and contribute to our economy, becoming an asset to Australia for generations and helping make our country stronger than it has ever been.
As a wealthy nation, Australia should provide care and support for less developed countries, and contribute our fair share to alleviate povertyand long term development.
Australia must engage with the world, not turn our backs on it.
We need to transition our defence and foreign policies to be multilateraland cooperative, asserting ourselves as a responsible and independent player in the international community.
In order to be an outward-looking, futurefocused country, Australia must have the self-confidence that can only come once we are a republic.
The Greens’ plan for a confident Australia includes a commitment to: Create a safe way for people to seek asylum in Australia, givingthem a better option than a boat journey and undercutting the people smuggler’s business model
Commit our fair share towardpoverty alleviation and development by increasing our overseas aid to 0.7% of GNI over the coming decade
Take a diplomacy-first approach to defence and foreign affairs,emphasising nonviolent global cooperation
Move Australia towards becoming a Republic with an Australian headof state
A BETTER WAY TO WELCOME PEOPLE SEEKING ASYLUM
We have a proud history of welcoming people to our country and helping those who are in need.
We need to create a safe way for people to seek asylum inAustralia; the Greens don’t want to see people risking their lives by getting on boats.
If we assess people’s claim’s efficiently and fairly, then fly them to Australia directly, we undercut the people smuggler’s business model because nobody will need to riskgetting on a leaky boat.
The other parties’ policies have failed and they are harming people.
It’s up to us to build a better way.
The billions of dollars that we will save from closing down the Manus Island and Nauru detention camps will be reinvested in helpingmore people than ever before.
Australians have been let down by more than a decade of failed leadership on this issue.
The Greens bold and responsible visionincludes a commitment to:Help 50,000 people who are in need of protection each year, including 10,000 people under a new ‘skilled refugee’ programme
Remove all children and their families from detention immediately, including those in offshore detention and on Nauru
Shut the detention camps on Manus Island and Nauru and abolish the practice of offshore detention
Give $500 million to assessment and support organisations in our region to speed up the process and give people access to educationand work rights while they wait
Abolish temporary protection visas and provide permanent protection to people seeking safety
Establish a royal commission to shine a light on the decades of damage and devastation caused by the policy of holding children and their families in detention
Introduce a 30-day time limit for people held in on-shore immigration detention
THE GREENS WILL: Increase the number of people Australia helps from 13,750 to 50,000 per year
Fairly and efficiently assess people’s refugee claims wherethey are waiting then fly them to Australia safely
Establish a Skilled Refugee visa program for 10,000 people
OVERSEAS AID: TOWARDS 0.7% OF GNI
Australia’s overseas aid contributions have been slashed to record lows.
We are a rich country and can afford to provide assistance to disadvantaged communities in low-income countries.
To meet the Sustainable Development Goals to end poverty, ensure universal education and gender equity, and improve child and maternal health, the United Nations agreed that developed nations should devote 0.7 per cent of GNI to overseas aid.
The old parties formerly committed to this target, but have since slashed aid funding to record lows.
Other countries around the world, including Norway, Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands, met this target years ago.
The British Government under David Cameron passed a bill last year that ensured that 0.7 per cent of British GNI would be put towards overseas development goals each year.
Australia is lagging well behind, to the detriment of our poorest neighbours.
As a wealthy nation, Australia should provide care and support for less developed countries and contribute our ‘fair share’ to poverty alleviation and long-term development.
The Greens plan to contribute our fair share of overseas aid includes a commitment to:  Increase our overseas aid contributions to 0.7% of GNI over the coming decade
Ensure the purpose and impact of aid is transparent and accountable
Provide greater focus on strengthening health systems to address sexual and reproductive health, and the prevention and consequences of HIV-AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and non-communicable diseases.
Increase transparency, accountability and effectiveness of gender equality in our aid program
PEACE AND SECURITY
Australia should take an independent and globally responsible approach to our foreign affairs and defence policies.
International cooperation rather than military intervention is needed toresolve most of the major foreign policy challenges that Australia faces.
Global warming looms as a multiplier of threats and an ongoing trigger of instability throughout the world.
In our region, humanitarian crises and natural disasters will become more frequent.
The relationship Australia has with our neighbours in the Asia-Pacific should be front and centre to our foreign policy.
Our priority should be to assist fragile states in our region in restoringpeace, stability and the rule-of-law.
In the face of humanitarian crises and natural disasters, we need to make sure our defence force is well equipped to assist those most in need.
Through an independent approach to our foreign affairs and defence policies, we can ensure Australia acts as a confident and constructiveplayer in our region and the world – one that respects international law, protects human rights, and advocates for our values.
The Greens plan for a confident Australia includes a commitment to: Pursue an independent foreign policy that puts the needs of Australians first
Require parliamentary approval for the deployment of Australian troops overseas
Focus on our region, ensuring that the Australian Defence Force is well equipped to assist our neighbours with humanitarian and disaster relief
Return defence spending to long-term trend levels, and ensure procurement and spending is based on risk assessment, not politics –including cancelling the hugely problematic contract to purchase 72 F-35 Joint Strike Fighters
Promote and support global nuclear disarmament, including a global treaty to ban nuclear weapons
TOWARDS AN AUSTRALIAN REPUBLIC
There’s never been a better time for Australia to become a republic.
With all three federal political leaders in favour of a republic, and with the state and territory leaders declaring their support, there’s more momentum than ever before.
Currently, Australia’s head of state is inherited from overseas and is determined by birth rather than merit.
A confident Australia needs an Australian head of state that will placeAustralian people and institutions at the heart of their work.
Australian children born today should have the opportunity to hold thisposition into the future.
Australia has our own values and identity, and we have carved ourselves an independent place in the world.
That should be reflected in independent government institutions, and an Australian head of state.
The Greens have a plan to move toward an Australian Republic which includes a commitment to: Use a combination of online and direct citizen forums across the country to consult with Australians and organisations about whetheror not Australia should become a republic and explore possible models
Address the threshold question and models for a republic informed by the state and territory discussions through a jury of citizens
Hold a plebiscite on the threshold question to allow Australians to indicate their support for a republic before voting on any specific republican model
Hold a national convention on the republic to work on technical aspects of constitutional amendments following the outcome of the plebiscite
Conclude with a referendum to formally put a proposal for a constitutional change to the Australian people
PROTECTING OUR PRECIOUS PLACES
From preventing the Great Barrier Reef becoming a coal highway to protecting our native forests from logging and global warming, commitment to our precious places has never been more important.
Around our nation, our environment is under threat from global warming, unsustainable development, mining and pollution – with the full support of the old parties.
By refusing to admit that massive new coal mines, and new gas fracking are huge contributors to global warming, they are signing the death warrants for some of our most precious natural places.
The Greens were founded on the vision of a robust and healthy environment.
We'll always stand to protect our precious places now and for future generations.
Dredging for coal and gas ports and mass coral bleaching are threatening the Great Barrier Reef.
New coal and gas mining is threatening our forests and food bowls.
Tasmania's incredible World Heritage wilderness is under threat from bushfires driven by global warming.
Forests and bushlands around the country, and their unique wildlife are under threat from tree clearing and logging.
Commitment to our precious places has never been more important. To ensure our reefs, forests and precious places are here for future generations, we must stand up to protect them.
The Greens have a plan to protect our precious places which includesa commitment to:Save our Great Barrier Reef, and invest in the jobs of the future, by transitioning away from coal and gas and implementing measures that will secure the long term health of the Reef
Enhance the sustainability of our unique environment, includingour native plants and animals, by supporting environmental initiatives like the Biodiversity Fund and Indigenous Rangers
End the destruction of our native forests, and protect our marine ecosystems
Deliver a new Environment Act and a tough new independent watchdog, the National Environment Protection Authority
PROTECTING OUR GREAT BARRIER REEF
Our Great Barrier Reef is at a tipping point.
Leading scientists say that this election is our “last chance” to save the Reef unless we take rapid action on global warming and dramatically cut water pollution.
The Reef is a national treasure, and the 69,000 jobs and $6 billion per year which it brings in for our economy are under threat.
The Greens have a $2.18 billion plan over 5 years to save the Reef.
Global warming, driven by mining and burning of coal and other fossil fuels, is already destroying parts of the Reef via coral bleaching.
The Reef has lost 50 per cent of its coral cover in the last 30 years and experts warn it could halve again in the next ten years.
It has recently suffered from the worst ever mass bleaching event affecting 93 per cent of all reefs.
Federal and State governments recognise that the Reef is in danger, but their addiction to coal and fossil fuels means they have not taken the necessary action.
For instance, the Liberal, Labor and National parties all support the environmentally disastrous and economically reckless Adani mega coal mine.
The Greens are outlining a plan to meet the scale of the challenge we face.
Our plan to save the Reef includes a commitment to: Act rapidly on global warming, with 90% clean energy by 2030, a ban on new coal mines and fracking projects, a thermal coal export levy, abolition of fossil fuel subsidies and a just transition for workers
Slash water pollution with a $2 billion fund over five years to help farmers reduce pollution, a legal cap on water pollution, protection against runaway tree clearing, and better monitoring
Stop damaging port expansion and ban all offshore dumping and capital dredging for fossil fuel port expansion by closing the loopholes in the federal and State government’s existing rules
Strengthen the Reef’s champions, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA) and the Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS) with $90 million in extra funding, independence and stronger powers
Protect pristine areas like the Fitzroy Delta, Cape York Peninsula, address illegal fishing and make shipping safer by increasing protection for seafarers
PROTECTING OUR ENVIRONMENT
Whether it is our oceans, our native wildlife, or our native forests, we know that Australia has one of the most unique natural environments in the world, and we need to do all we can to protect it.
Never before in history has our natural environment been threatened with such degradation from global warming, mining, logging, tree clearing and unsustainable land use.
Iconic ecosystems like the Great Australian Bight are under threat from exploration by oil and gas companies.
Our oceans are being impacted by global warming, overfishing, marine pollution and debris, commercial shipping and offshore oil and gas exploration & production.
Critically endangered species like the Leadbeater’s Possum are at grave risk of extinction because of native forest logging.
To avoid losing our precious places and species forever, Australia must support those initiatives and programs that are working hard to protectour environment.
The Greens plan to protect our environment includes a commitment to: Re-establish the Biodiversity Fund to expand our protected areas, stop the loss of native wildlife, and better manage our established national parks, forests and reserves
Protect our unique native wildlife by investing in a Threatened Species Plan to map and protect critical habitat and to fund existing, unfunded recovery plans
Double the funding for the Indigenous Rangers program, which delivers significant benefits for people, country and the economy
Protect and plan a sustainable future for Australia’s forests, including the immediate end to logging in high conservation value forests and a rapid planned transition out of native forest logging
Protect marine ecosystems by immediately activating our marine reserves, suspended by the Abbott-Turnbull Government
Stop oil and gas exploration in the Great Australia Bight
STRONG ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS
The major indicators of the health of our natural world, including nativewildlife, invasive pests and weeds, soil health and protection of freshwater are all worse than they were three decades ago when our national environment laws began.
Australia’s precious places are under threat from mining, logging,development, invasive species and the impacts of global warming.
Our national environment laws and agencies are meant to protect the places and wildlife which are so important, so fragile, and which mattered to all Australians.
The last 15 years has shown that they have failed.
Thousands of damaging developments have gone ahead and many more of our iconic and important animals and plants are in danger of becoming extinct.
Global warming is further increasing the pressure on our fragile environment.
Our current national laws have failed to protect our precious placesand stop our wildlife heading towards extinction.
To protect our precious places, we need environment laws that will stop the biodiversity crisis, save our threatened species, and protect our precious places.
We can protect what we love about Australia, now and into the future.
The Greens have a plan for strong environmental laws, including acommitment to: Establish an independent watchdog, the National Environment Protection Authority (NEPA), which will enforce our environmental laws and provide independent advice free from the influence of politicians and the big business lobby
Create a new Environment Act as the next generation of strong national environment laws, expanding federal protection and putting tough limits on development to protect nature
Give Australians the environmental democracy they deserve by improving community rights and access to justice
RENEWED DEMOCRACY
Renewing our democracy is vital to ensure that we all have a say in the decisions shaping our future and that our representatives are accountable to us.
For too long, wealthy individuals and corporations have wielded too much power.
We see it in the lobbyists that prowl the halls of Parliament House, in the mega donations made to political parties by fossil fuel companies,and the lack of transparency around political corruption.
Australians are over it.
When wealth and power are concentrated in a few hands, democracy cannot flourish.
We need to break this model of business and politics as usual and take the power back.
A strong, truly representative and participatory democracy delivering for the people is our only hope.
This means creating opportunities for all Australians to be more engaged and empowered by our democratic processes.
We have a great opportunity with a new and reformed Senate electoral system that puts votes and power back into the hands of the voters.
But the Greens know we need to take this reform further, renewing our democracy with greater transparency, accountability and participation.
The Greens have a plan to renew our democracy which includesa commitment to: Clean up politics at the federal level through a national anti-corruptionwatchdog
Fix our political donations laws with greater transparency measures and bans on donations from industries that have an unsavoury track record in influencing decision makers
Give all Australians the power to participate by using digital technologyto open up new opportunities for engaging with the democratic process
Put the freedom back into our Freedom of Information laws
NATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION COMMISSION
Anti-corruption commissions at the state level have revealed now infamous instances of corruption, illegal donations and undue influence of the corporate sector in Australian politics.
We know this systemic corruption does not stop at state borders, and yet there is still no anti-corruption commission at the federal level.
Every state government jurisdiction in Australia now has some kind of anticorruption commission – the Federal level of government should not be an exception.
And most Australians agree, with successive polls showingoverwhelming support for a national anti-corruption watchdog.
That’s why we urgently need a National Anti-Corruption Commission to oversee anti-corruption measures at a federal level, and to close the revolving door between business and politics.
The Greens have introduced our National Integrity Commission Bill into successive parliaments.
More recent travel entitlement scandals have made action more urgent.
It’s beyond time for the other parties to get behind this and restore public confidence in the political system
We know the vast majority of Australians want a federal corruption watchdog, with more than 80 per cent of ABC Vote Compass respondents supporting the plan.
Reintroducing our plan for a National Anti-Corruption Commission will be a top priority for the Greens in the next parliament.
The Greens’ plan for holding public officials and politicians to accountincludes a commitment to: Establish an independent National Anti-Corruption Commission to investigate and prosecute misconduct at the federal level, including politicians, department, agencies and staff
Include a Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner to address corruption in the Australian Federal Police and Australian Crime Commission
Include an Independent Parliamentary Adviser to give confidential advice to ministers, parliamentarians and former parliamentarians in relation to conflict of interest, entitlements claims and other matters
CLEANING UP POLITICAL DONATIONS
Parliament should serve the best interests of all Australians.
Those with money and wealth shouldn’t be able to buy political influence on issues that matter most, like global warming.
|The laws on political donations need to be cleaned up, just like the old polluting industries that exploit them.
Over the last 3 years, the old parties have accepted almost $3.7 million from fossil fuel companies.
This money buys influence that clouds politicians’ judgment when debating crucial issues like our sustainable energy future.
Little progress has been made over the years in federal politics to reduce the influence of donations over the political process, especiallycompared with the states.
There are no limits on expenditure or on who can donate to parties, and transparency is seriously lacking.
The Greens have a plan to clean up the corrupting influence of political donations in Australia, through a combination of greater transparency measures and bans on donations from industries that have an unsavoury track record in influencing decision makers.
The Greens plan to clean up political donations includes a commitment to: Ban donations from the fossil fuel industry, as well as property developers and the tobacco, liquor and gambling industries
Introduce political donations reform, including a ban on all foreign political donations and anonymous donations over $50
Cap election campaign expenditure by parties, candidates and third parties
Enhance disclosure and transparency by lowering the disclosure threshold to $1000, and adopt mandatory, real-time reporting ofdonations by political parties
Better resource the Australian Electoral Commission to enforce full disclosure and investigate discrepancies
PARLIAMENT BY THE PEOPLE
When wealth and power are concentrated in a few hands, democracy cannot flourish.
When we’re seeing our politics increasingly captured by vested interests, it’s critical that we reclaim space for Australians to directly participate in their democracy.
Technology can distribute power throughout our communities and enhance the democratic process.
The more people participate, the healthier our democracy
Technology has made it easy for ideas to be widely circulatedand debated, and for support and interest to be gauged.
The ability to directly influence legislation and debate will strengthenparticipation in the political process, and increase legitimacy of our parliament.
By giving Australians easier avenues to engage with political issues and their representatives, we can enhance transparency and accountabilityacross a range of areas, including our federal budget, foreign affairs, and human rights.
The Greens plan to increase participation in democracy through technology includes a commitment to: use interactive technology to facilitate public participation in annual government budget-setting to determine priorities for new infrastructure and services and revenue-raising measures.
Strengthen links between the community and the parliament through the Australian Citizens’ Initiative to make sure the issues the community cares about are debated in our parliament
Put freedom back into FOI by requiring all government departments to proactively release information in an easily searchable format
Enhance legitimacy of a new human rights bill by enabling all Australians to contribute to its contents
DEMOCRACY FOR THE NEXT GENERATION
Deliberative and participatory democracy technology has alreadybeen proven successful around the world, including at the localgovernment level in Australia.
These tools enable voters to prioritise the things they care about, and enable our representatives to be responsive to the views of their communities.
EQUALITY AND COMPASSION
As a prosperous nation, Australia can ensure that all people are treated fairly, are treated with compassion and can access world-class public health care, education and services.
But there remain those in our community who struggle to accessservices, who aren’t able to enjoy the full rights to which they are entitled, and who are being prevented from fully participating in our society.
We want a stronger, fairer Australia in which people have adequate income support, and a strong social safety net that they can rely onin times of need.
We want to ensure that all Australians have access to safe and affordable housing, and well funded, world-class hospitals and health care.
We want to make sure that all Australians – including women, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, people with disabilities, people from culturally and linguistically diverse communities and the LGBTI community – have access to all the rights and services that they need.
We want to make sure that Australian law protects animals from cruelty.
The Greens have a plan for an equaland compassionate Australia which includes a commitment to:Tackle inequality and create a social safety net for the 21st Century
End the housing affordability crisis through assistance for homelessnessservices, renewing public and community housing, and tackling the cost of housing by removing unfair tax concessions like negative gearing
Invest in a healthier Australia by properly funding hospitals and betterhealth care
Ensure equality for women through confronting our domestic violencecrisis, paid parental leave and safe access to abortion
Empower and invest in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, to create community driven solutions
Ensure a right to independence, selfdetermination and full participationfor people with a disability, including making the NDIS the best it can be
End discrimination of LGBTIQ couples by legislating for marriage equality
Promote animal welfare and end the cruelty of live animal exports
STRENGTHENING OUR SOCIAL SAFETY NET
A strong social security safety net is the foundation of a more inclusive and productive society.
No-one in a country as rich in Australia should be living in poverty.
Australia has had decades of economic growth, but the benefits haven’t been equally shared.
As our economy has grown, so has inequality.
Inequality in Australia is higher than the OECD average, and a person in the top 20 per cent has around five times as much income as someone in the bottom.
Wealth is even more unevenly distributed.
People in the top 20 per cent have around 70 times more wealth than a person in the bottom 20 per cent.
Poverty and inequality have devastating impacts on life outcomes, undermining health and educational opportunities, access to safe and appropriate housing, transport, employment and childcare, and many other aspects of full participation in society.
The Greens have a comprehensive plan to tackle inequality in Australia which includes a commitment to: lift key payments including Newstart, provide single parents with more support, and reverse Coalition cuts to income support.
Develop a national anti-poverty plan to provide a coordinated, cross-government approach to tackling poverty
Guarantee access to social services, prioritising areas of greatest need
Establish an Equality Commission, to provide advice to Government and Parliament on our income support system and progress on reducing inequality.
Poverty is a daily challenge for many Australians, holding them back from leading productive and meaningful lives.
THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF SOCIAL SERVICES ESTIMATES THAT AFTER HOUSING COSTS, 13.9 % OF AUSTRALIANS, OR 2.55 MILLION PEOPLE, ARE LIVING BELOW THE POVERTY LINE.
THAT INCLUDES 603,000 CHILDREN AND 40 PER CENT OF PEOPLE RELYING ON INCOME SUPPORT.
ENDING THE HOUSING AFFORDABILITY CRISIS
Australia can be a great place to live, but the cost of buying or renting a home has become extreme.
It has become far too hard for first home buyers and renters to find quality housing near where they work, play and take their kids to school.
This means long commutes, less time and higher transport costs.
Australia’s chronic undersupply of affordable housing is at a crisis point.
Years of underinvestment in affordable housing supply has been accompanied by decades of generous subsidies to property investors and speculators which has driven prices up as investors outcompete first home buyers.
Our housing market is now one of the most unaffordable in the world.
In addition, every night, 105,000 Australians don’t have a place to call home.
That’s one in every two hundred people – up 17 per cent since 2006.
It’s only going to get worse if we don’t change our system.
The Greens’ plan to tackle our affordability crisis head on includes a commitment to: Reform negative gearing for future investments to stop billions of dollars each year being used to unfairly subsidise property investors at the expense of housing affordability
Remove the Capital Gains Tax Discount to rebalance the structural unfairness in the tax system
Double federal funding for homelessness services and sign a new ten-year National Partnership Agreement on Homelessness to provide ongoing security for this vital sector
Increase Commonwealth Rent assistance by 30% to help more than one million Australians struggling with rental stress
Install rooftop solar and retrofit Australia’s entire public and community housing stock by 2030 to lower the cost of living and improve quality of life for low-income Australians
More than a quarter are children under 18, most of them are fleeing family breakdowns or domestic violence
More than 300 people a day are turned away from homelessness services
Nationally, less than 1% of private rental properties are affordable to low income households
The Abbott - Turnbull Government cut almost $600m from homelessness and housing affordability programs
INVESTING IN OUR HEALTH
Every Australian deserves good healthcare.
Where you live, or how much money you earn, shouldn’t decide howwell you get looked after when you are sick.
The Greens have worked hard to protect Medicare from Government cuts, have championed Denticare, and led calls for extra investment in mental health services – especially in regional areas.
The Greens see health as an investment, not a cost.
Ensuring that our health system will always be accessible, affordable and universal is our priority.
The Abbott/Turnbull Government has taken Australia’s hospitals to the edge of a funding cliff that will decimate the health system and leave patients out in the cold.
Our primary care system is not currently meeting the needs of the one in five Australians living with multiple chronic diseases.
Our palliative care systems are under-resourced.
Millions of Australians put off essential dental care because they can’t afford it, leading to serious health problems.
The Greens’ affordable plan to give more Australians access to the healthcare they need includes a commitment to:Restore the funding model where the Commonwealth and the states share the rising costs in delivering hospital services evenly
Secure the funding formula for the long term by enshrining it into law, so that the states have some certainty, and so that future governments will require the Senate’s approval to reduce the Commonwealth’s share of hospital funding
Invest in primary care to ensure the effective management of chronic disease
Reinvest funding raised from abolition of the private health insurance rebate into public health and hospitals
Ensure publicly funded dental care through Denticare, to give more Australians access to their local dentist for the essential treatmentthey need
Invest in mental health to ensure access to effective treatment across Australia
Invest in measures to close the gap in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health outcomes
Deliver a National Rural Health Plan to ensure your postcode no longer determines your health
Tackle childhood obesity with a tax on sugary drinks
Invest in palliative care services, to improve quality of life of patients, carers and their families facing problems associated with life-threatening illness
Promote harm reduction with a Harm Reduction Innovation Fund
Protect children from alcohol advertising with a ban during peak times
EQUALITY FOR WOMEN
Australian women have a right to equality in all aspects of life, andthis must be reflected in our laws and society.
The Greens have a long and proud history of standing up for women’s rights and full equality, and are committed to doing all we can to fight gender discrimination.
Women in Australia face many challenges.
We’re in the middle of a domestic violence crisis, but the services that support women who need help to escape violence are chronicallyunderfunded.
Outdated, conservative attitudes still influence our public debates.
Women continue to be paid less than men – in fact, the current gender pay gap of 17.9 per cent is the highest it’s been for two decades.
Women are disproportionately affected by unfair tax breaks in the superannuation system.
Legal and financial barriers to securing safe, accessible and affordable abortion remain around the country.
And they’re underpaid and undervalued when it comes to paid parental leave.
The Australian Greens have a plan to stand up for Australian women, which includes a commitment to: Increase investment in frontline services for victims and survivors of domestic violence, with a ten-year, $5 billion commitment
Introduce a progressive super system that will go a long way to reducing the inequity women currently face in retirement
Invest in decriminalisation, access and reducing out-of-pocket costs of abortion
Tackle the gender pay gap by legislating to end pay gag clauses
Reduce barriers for mums returning to work by investing in affordable childcare
Australia is in the middle of a domestic violence crisis but our safety net is full of holes.
Domestic and family violence touches people from every walk of life. The data indicates that 1 in 3 WOMEN IN AUSTRALIA HAVE EXPERIENCED VIOLENCE SINCE AGE 15.
The Greens are putting forward a bold plan to increase investment in front line services with a ten-year, $5 billion commitment.
EMPOWERING AND SUPPORTING ABORIGINALAND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER PEOPLES
Australia has unfinished business; the Greens acknowledge that sovereignty was never ceded.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have a strong and unbroken connection to the land and sea.
To be a truly reconciled nation, it is crucial that we address the issues of sovereignty and treaties.
It is past time for these issues to be resolved.
Twenty-five years after the final report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, there are still too many Aboriginal people incarcerated, and dying in prison
Despite some modest gains in health indicators for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, much more must be done to close the gap in health outcomes between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and non-Indigenous Australians.
The latest data suggests there is still around a decade difference in lifeexpectancy between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, andnon-Indigenous Australians.
Education outcomes are unequal.
At the same time, even after a long history of injustice, too often Aboriginal voices struggle to be heard.
The Greens support approaches that empower and invest in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, to create community driven solutions.
The Greens plan includes a commitment to:  Provide $30 million to advance the national conversation on sovereignty and treaties
Set a national justice target, develop a national strategy to address incarceration rates, and provide $40 million for projects to reduce incarceration rates
Invest in key health programs, and work to make sure the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Plan succeeds
Re-fund the National Congress of Australia’s First Peoples
Provide $20 million in funding for projects to reduce the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children entering out of home care
Develop a plan to implement the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and provide $20 million for projects to support domestic implementation
Ensure funding for mental health services and suicide prevention
Double funding for the Indigenous Rangers program, which has proven benefits for people, country and the economy
Continue to stand alongside Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities against the Stronger Futures process and income management
SUPPORTING PEOPLE WITH DISABILITY
Everyone has a right to independence, self-determination and to be able to participate fully in society.
People with disability, their families and carers, should be able to actively participate in policy, service planning and delivery.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) is a fundamental shift, enabling people with disability to control their services and supports.
The Greens want a fully funded rollout of the NDIS, to ensure the NDIS is the best it can be.
People with disability should also have access to a strong social safety net.
The Greens have fought cuts by the old parties to the Disability Support Pension (DSP), and will campaign to make sure that the DSP is available to everyone who needs it.
The Greens also initiated and chaired a Senate inquiry into violence, abuse and neglect of people with disability in residential settings.
This highlighted the widespread abuse of people with disability, and made clear recommendations for a Royal Commission and immediate government action.
The Greens plan to support people with disability includes a commitment to: Ensure there is a national roll-out of a fully funded National Disability Insurance Scheme, to ensure it is the best it can be
Provide $2.3 million to make audio description available on the ABC iView
Develop a national action plan for making audio description more widely available across public and commercial broadcasters
Reverse Coalition cuts to the Disability Support Pension, so that people with a disability can continue to access income support
Establish a Royal Commission into the violence, abuse and neglect of people with disability in institutional settings
Provide $42.3 million to limit preventable blindness, and $19 million annually for measures to target children with hearing impairment
Ensure students with a disability are funded for the extra school resources they need to support their education
The Greens initiated and chaired the Senate inquiry into the violence, abuse and neglect of people with disability in residential settings.
That inquiry held hearings and heard hundreds of accounts from across the country, including more than 150 written submissions.
Violence, abuse and neglect of people with disability iswidespread and on-going; data shows that over a quarter of allsexual assault victims identify as having a disability.
A Royal Commission is essential to bring to justice theperpetrators responsible and ensure that this abuse stops.
EQUALITY FOR THE LGBTIQ COMMUNITY
Valuing diversity and celebrating difference benefits all of us.
The Greens always have, and always will, stand with our lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer communities.
LGBTIQ communities continue to face discrimination, attacks on human rights and limited access to vital services.
Limitations in anti-discrimination law, the Turnbull Government proposal for a divisive and expensive plebiscite on marriage equality, and attacks on the Safe Schools program all illustrate the conservative attacks faced by LGBTIQ communities.
The Australian Greens are a strong voice in our parliament for LGBTIQ rights.
Our plan to keep LGBTIQ rights firmly on the agenda, in the community and in our political debate includes a commitment to: Continue to push for a free vote on marriage equality, and push the Turnbull Government to ditch the plebiscite
Strengthen anti-discrimination laws by eliminating exemptions that currently enable religious organisations to discriminate based on sexuality
Defend and protect the Safe Schools program, and expand its funding
Ensure better access to HIV-prevention medication by advocating for PrEP to be listed under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, and provide a funding guarantee for people at high risk of exposure to HIV
Work hard to change laws so same-sex couples can access assisted reproduction techniques like IVF, and be able to adopt children
Remove barriers to hormone treatments for transgender and gender diverse young people
Ensure the rights of intersex people are respected and protected
Improve mental health care and aged care for LGBTIQ people
ENDING CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
There is growing public support for animal welfare to be part of ourapproach to all animals in Australia.
Revelations of horrific mistreatment of animals in the live-export trade has launched a groundswell of public demand to end the practice.
Consumers are calling for Australia to align itself with other nations around the world by banning cosmetic animal testing.
A growing number of Australians are opting to buy ‘free-range’ eggs to avoid the horrific cruelty of factory farming.
Despite this public demand for humane and accountable treatment of animals, governments continue to sanction cruelty by refusing to change woefully inadequate minimum animal welfare standards and make industry transparent and accountable.
The Greens are deeply committed to improving the welfare and wellbeing of animals, and will continue working with Australia’s animal welfare and rights organisations to achieve this.
The Greens have a plan to end cruelty to animals in Australia which includes a commitment to: Transition away from the cruel live animal export trade,
and support our domestic meat processing sector by growing our more economically sustainable chilled meat trade
Establish an Independent Office of Animal Welfare to promote and oversee animal welfare in Australia
Ban cruel cosmetic testing on animals
Establish an accurate national labelling system of products that identifies cruelty-free, free-range, organic, and free from content derived from habitat destruction
Upgrade standards for farming practices for all agricultural animals which reflect commonly understood definitions of freerange and other ethical treatment of animals
THE HORRIFIC MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE LIVE EXPORTTRADE CONTINUES.
Evidence shows Australia’s minimal live export welfare regulations do not work.
MORE THAN 1.2 million SHEEP HAVE DIED DURING THE CRUEL JOURNEY FROM AUSTRALIA OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS.
Australia can provide a more economically robust and humane alternative to the live export trade by boosting boxed meat exports.
NEW ECONOMY
The Greens are the only party that understands that the economy must work for the benefit of society and not the other way around.
Australians are forward-looking, well-educated and early adopters of new technologies.
We have everything we need to build the new clean economy, except the political will to invest public money for the future and the courage to take on the vested interests of the past.
With the right policies, the new economy will be driven by clean energy.
Together with smart investment, we can provide opportunities for innovators and entrepreneurs, supporting them so Australia can become a global centreof ideas.
The latest in science and business development can drive innovations in health care, agriculture, tourism and advanced manufacturing generating more jobs.
We need to ensure that Australians have access to education throughout their life, from their earliest years into their employment
We need an early childhood education and care sector that is affordable and accessible,and schools funding based on needs, not sectors or means.
We need a vibrant higher education sector, including fixing our broken vocational education and training sector.
We want to ensure all Australians benefit from a lifetime of learning.
The Greens have a plan which includes a commitment to:Reverse the government’s antiinnovative and climate destroying policies, and increase Australia’s investment in science and innovation
Ensure every Australian child has access to early childhood education and care by providing families with 24 hours of universal subsidised care per week
Create a world-class school education system with needs based funding for all
Prioritise and support TAFE as a critical part of the Australian education system
Continue to fight against higher fees for university students, by reducing HELP costs by 20% and reinstating scholarship support
Work toward a cost-effective and future proof NBN,
and stand up for the digital rights of Australians
Reverse the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s harsh cuts to the ABC and SBS
Stand up for small business by levelling the playing field
Put people at the centre of our workplace laws to create a more caring society and support working people throughout their lives
SCIENCE AND INNOVATION
Australia’s economy is in transition like never before, and to make the most of these opportunities, we need to invest in science and innovation.
Innovation is more than a buzzword.
The world we are part of faces unprecedented challenges but also unparalleled opportunities.
The future drivers of the global economy will be innovators and entrepreneurs.
But we need to invest and support them if we want Australia to become a global centre of ideas.
The latest in science and business development can drive innovations in health care, agriculture, tourism and advanced manufacturing, generating more jobs.
Our service sector will flourish creating further jobs for people workingfor and with people.
The Greens, Australia’s political disruptors, will reverse the government’s anti-innovative and climate destroying policies.
Our policies would create a smarter, more innovative country,and help end Australia’s dependence on the industries of last century.
AUSTRALIA IS RATED 17TH IN THE WORLD ON THE GLOBALINNOVATION INDEX.
THIS IS NOT GOOD ENOUGH, AS WE FALL TO 72nd IN THE WORLD WHEN IT COMES TO TURNING RESEARCH INTO COMMERCIAL OUTCOMES.
The Greens’ plan to invest and support science and innovation includes a commitment to: Secure our future through research and development with our roadmap to increase R&D investment to 4% of GDP
Set up an Innovation Commissioner, tasked with working with industry, universities, business, government agencies and Innovation and Science Australia to advance the innovation agenda
Reverse the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s massive cuts to innovation funding, which will allow start-ups access to crucial early stage capital grants
Protecting science and research by restoring funding to the CSIRO
Invest in sustainable agriculture, boosting funding for agricultural R&D to address the broad, cross-sectoral issues and challenges our farmers and growers are facing
Commit $8.47 million in funding to help drive Australia’s evolution from the lucky country to the smart country
Commit $678.9 million to increase uptake of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics subjects in our schools and universities
Incentivise and support social innovation and local investment in innovation and venture capital through the Future Fund
EDUCATION EQUALITY
The Greens know that investment in public education is essential to ensure a fair Australia and is a key part of our transition to a sustainable new economy.
We’re committed to ensuring that all Australian kids have access toworld class child care, early childhood education and schools.
We know that early childhood education is crucial for a child’s development, but that it remains drastically underfunded.
Universal access to early childhood education and case (ECEC) should be central to a much needed overhaul of the childcare sector.
We know that our schools are chronically underfunded, putting pressure on teachers, students and parents.
And we know that less than half of students with disability in Australianschools are currently being funded for their support needs.
This is unacceptable, and unfair: it fails students, and it fails our schools.
The Greens have a plan for an equitable, accessible and world class education system that includes a commitment to:Cut out-of-pocket expenses to families by providing 24 hours of universal subsidized early childhood education and care per week
Increase access to early childhood education and care for all children by making more spaces available and reducing waiting list times, especially in high need areas by introducing a $200 million ‘Reducing Waiting Lists’ grants fund for centres to increase the number of spaces that they offer
Ensure schools funding is based on needs, by honouring the full Gonksi six years of National Education Reform Agreement (NERA) for all jurisdictions
Enable an equitable education for all by funding an extra $1.1 billion into disability in schools for 2016–17
Provide extra funding for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) and entrepreneurial curriculums and teaching incentives
Introduce a sustainable schools fund, built on an initiative that The Greens rolled out in Tasmania, where schools can bid to the fund for energy and water efficiency projects and renewables
STANDING UP FOR HIGHER EDUCATION
The Greens have the courage to back students and make high-quality post-secondary education accessible to all Australians.
University students face more barriers to education than ever before.
The Labor and Liberal parties have increased student debt and class sizes, while cutting student support.
With the Coalition committed to deregulation, studying at university will likely become out of reach for many students from lower-income ordisadvantaged backgrounds.
HELP debts could grow to the size of a housing deposit – or more.
Similarly, the challenges faced by TAFE are unprecedented.
The slash and burn approach by the Liberals along with commercialisingthe sector has reduced the number of students attending TAFE, and resulted in fees skyrocketing and campuses being forced to abandon many courses deemed unsuitable due to this commercialised approach.
The Greens believe that all Australians are entitled to free, well-funded and high quality, life-long education and training.
To make this happen, the Greens have a plan which includes a commitment to:Fight against higher fees for university students by reducing students’ HELP costs by 20%
Fund a 10% increase in base funding per student at public universities, to help universities deliver high quality courses without student fees skyrocketing
Ensure low-income students are supported through reinstatement of the Student Start- Up Scholarships, which were turned into loans by the Liberal and Labor parties
Reverse Labor and the Liberals’ funding cuts to university research, to restabilise this important funding stream
Cease providing federal government funds to for-profit VET providers
Implement a TAFE federal rescue package to boost funding for schools and students
Establish a VET Ombudsman to oversee the investigation of complaints of improper activity by VET providers
The Coalition has been pushing to deregulate course fees since their first budget in 2014.
Legislating this change would see $100K degrees become a reality and would make it increasingly difficult for young people to enter into the housing market and invest in other significant life decisions.
THE GREENS HAVE PLAYED A VITAL ROLE FIGHTING AGAINST – AND BLOCKING – THESE FEE INCREASES, WHICH HAVE BEEN A BLATANT COSTSHIFTING EXERCISE BY THE COALITION.
THE DIGITAL ECONOMY
The future of the new economy hinges on access to world class digitalinfrastructure, the protection of digital rights, and a strong communications sector.
We cannot be an innovative nation while we are encumbered by the mistakes of the Abbott- Turnbull Government.
We know that reliance on on Fibre to the Node (FTTN) and the dilapidated copper network was an avoidable mistake.
We know that our rights online are being trampled, as government has given law enforcement and spy agencies free reign over the internet.
Australian Internet Service Providers are now required by law to retain data on their users, which law enforcement and government agencies may access at any time, with no judicial oversight.
We need this infrastructure as more and more Australians are using the internet in their everyday lives.
The NBN is one of the most ambitious infrastructure projects ever attempted in Australia, and in the event of the change of Government, we will have an important opportunity to hit reset on this troubled project, and bring it to completion.
Access to digital networks is a right, and it is incumbent upon government to make it fast and affordable.
This is critical to ensure the future of Australia’s digital economy.
The Greens’ plan for a digital economy includes a commitment to: Immediately undertake a multi-party inquiry into the most cost-effective and future-proof architecture for the NBN
Continue to fight against any legislation that reduces online security, safety or privacy
Overturn the expensive and intrusive yet ineffective mandatory data retention scheme
Introduce a Digital Rights Commissioner to advocate for the online security, safety and privacy of all Australians, and advise legislators and public servants on the impacts of proposed and existing laws on security, safety and privacy online
YOUR RIGHTS ONLINE
The Greens fought to prevent the introduction of the mandatory data retention legislation, and have opposed measures that make the Internet less open, less secure, and less free, or intrudes on individual privacy.
With both Liberal and Labor legislating away our online rights and freedoms, the Greens have called for a Digital Rights Commissioner to scrutinise government legislation, policy and procedures.
STANDING UP FOR SMALL BUSINESS
The Greens will always stand up for small business against the big endof town.
There are over 2 million small businesses operating in Australia.
In fact, around 97% of all businesses in Australia are small businesses.
Small business also provides nearly 5 million Australians with a job – that's around 44% of our entire workforce.
Small businesses play a vital role in the economy, providing jobs to almost half the workforce and playing a part in localcommunities in a way big business never can.
The Greens know the burden and risk that many people take on when they establish a business.
With just over one in ten small businesses closing every year, we know it's tough for this sector.
The Greens’ plan to stand up for small business includes a commitment to:Continue to fight for market fairness through implementation of an Effects Test
Relieve small business operators of the administrative burden of acting as an agent for employee superannuation funds
Work to restore the loss-carry-back provision, axed by the Abbott-Turnbull Government, to help small business through good times and bad
Increase the small business entity turnover threshold from an annual turnover of no more than $2 million per annum, to an annual turnover of no more than $10 million per annum, to better reflect what can be regarded as small in today’s international marketplace
Extend the increase in the instant asset write-off threshold, and increase the threshold for GST registration
Support small business with a package of mental health programs,
encourage take up of renewables in Australian businesses
Reform the VET sector to ensure small businesses can employ the skills they need to succeed
WORKING TO LIVE, NOT LIVING TO WORK
Job insecurity and time pressure are on the rise.
Workplace laws should let people have a secure job, a good balancebetween working, personal and family life, and protect people’s rights at work.
In a generous and caring society like ours, supporting every employee to balance their caring and personal responsibilities with paid employment should be at the heart of our workplace laws.
We need proper paid parental leave, which enables mums and dads to have more paid time off with their newborns, not less.
We need more secure work, underpinned by guarantees such as regular and predictable hours and pay, access to paid leave and other entitlements
And we need representative workplaces, that reflect the diversity of Australian society and that everyone should have equal access to meaningful paid employment.
The Greens’ plan to put people back at the centre of workplace laws includes a commitment to:Legislate to give people who have been in their job for 12 months enforceable rights to request flexible working arrangements, including thenumber of hours they work, the scheduling of those hours and the location of work
Legislate to protect penalty rates and the weekend
Strengthen existing provisions for carers, to make sure people have the flexibility they need to care for their loved ones
Legislate for more secure work, including pathways for casual employees into more secure work, and allowing unions and employer organisations to make applications to the Fair Work Commission for ‘secure employment orders’ on a sector or industry-wide basis
Legislate to require the Australian Public Service to double the representation of people with a disability and people from non-English speaking backgrounds within the public service by 2018
Oppose any return to WorkChoices
PROTECTING WEEKEND PENALTY RATES
Many thousands of Australians depending on weekend rates of pay to make ends meet.
Many young people in particular depend on weekend rates to support themselves, including while they study.
Young people are already facing unaffordable housing, insecure work and low levels of student assistance, so cutting weekend rates would place them under immense pressure.
It is time that people have certainty about the future of their weekend rates.
It is time to ensure people’s weekend rates are protected by law.
Labor talks tough on penalty rates, yet they have committed to joining the Liberals in accepting weekend penalty rates being cut should the Fair Work Commission hit Sunday rates of pay.
The Greens are the only party that will legislate to protect weekend rates for the hundreds of thousands of Australians who depend on them.
GREENING THE BUDGET
The Greens want an Australia where everyone gets great public education and healthcare, and where we can fund vital nation building infrastructure.
This means being upfront about growing our revenue base by getting rid of unfair tax breaks, asking the very wealthy to pay more and directing investment into productive areas of the economy.
It’s time to grow the new economy, using clean energy to generate sustainable jobs and income for the future.
That means we need to stop treating debt like a four letter word.
Borrowing now so you’ve got a productive asset in the future makes for a worthwhile investment.
The Greens have outlined a policy platform that has been fully costed by the Parliamentary Budget Office and fully funded by announced savings and new revenue.
Our platform is underpinned by sound economic management principles.
RAISE THE REVENUE WE NEED SO THAT EVERYONE CAN GET WORLDCLASS PUBLIC HEALTH CARE, EDUCATION & SERVICES AND SOWE CAN GROW THE NEW ECONOMY
We will restore government revenue to around 26% of GDP, the same level as under John Howard, within the next 4 years primarily by reforming unfair tax breaks such as the diesel fuel rebate for miners, superannuation tax concessions, capital gains tax concessions and negative gearing for new properties.
We will oppose new taxes that increase inequality, like lifting the GST, and support new taxes on environmental harms, such as carbon pollution, and new taxes that tackle inequality, like a new marginal tax rate for millionaires.
Green a growing economy
We will seek to grow key sectors of the economy including advanced manufacturing, education and services, tourism, agriculture and clean energy.
We will aim for 15 year growth targets for some sectors, for example our target of 90% renewable energy by 2030.
We will decouple growth from pollution and continue to push for a better way of measuring the country’s wellbeing.
Get money moving
Instead of having public money tied up in unproductive areas, like unfair tax breaks or inflating the real estate market, money should be put to work to build the new economy
We also need to borrow sensibly to fund the infrastructure we need.
There is greater scope for government debt to fund infrastructure and productive capital such as public transport, renewable energy and getting freight on to rail.
Grow the new economy and restorerevenue before returning to surplus
The question is not whether we are in deficit or surplus, the question is whether any surplus has been fairly achieved and whether any deficit is sustainable.
As we grow the new economy any deficits should be kept to around 3% GDP.
To ensure a better national conversation about debt and deficit, government borrowings for capital works should also be accounted for in a separate set of acccounts.
Budgets should reduce inequality
A key role of government is to reduce inequality, and Budgets are an important part of that task.
Budgets should be accompanied by an ‘inequality impact’ statement, which shows how the Budget will reduce inequality in Australia.
