Investing in our schools and TAFEs: opportunity, equity and innovation
Labor wants your child to be given the same chance to succeed at school as any other child in the country.
So our policy is school funding should go where it is most needed — to ensure the best education outcome for all Australian kids.
POSITIVE POLICY
Your Child. Our Future. Full Gonski And More. Needs Based School Funding.
Improving education is the key to opportunity, to innovation and to the future economic and social prosperity of our nation.
No matter what their background, no matter where they live - city, suburb or in the regions – no matter what type of school they go to – Government, Catholic or Independent, Labor wants every child to have the same chance of succeeding at school, and in life, as any other child in the country.
Additional school funding is an investment, and we want to see the best possible return for every student, and as a country.
Labor is putting education at the centre of our positive program for government.
For the Prime Minister to talk about innovation while he is cutting funding to schools, TAFE and universities is just that – nothing but talk.
Labor’s education plan will drive innovation and opportunity by improving education outcomes for all Australian students.
Your Child.
Our Future will put needs-based funding permanently at the heart of our school system – so every student in every school will get the support they need to achieve their best.
Labor’s plan will deliver: More one-on-one support and attention for every student
Early intervention programs in every school, so that students don’t fall behind
Remedial literacy and numeracy support in every school
Extension classes to challenge students that are excelling in class
Increased Year 12 completion through more alternative and vocational pathways, so all students leave school with the skills they need for jobs in the modern economy
Access to specialist allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists
A focus on evidence based teaching and learning to make sure our schools do more of what works, and less of what doesn’t
More subject choices
More extra-curricular activities
The choice is simple: Labor believes in investing in every Australian student to give them the opportunity to reach their potential, the Liberals will just continue with a broken and unfair system that leaves most Australian kids unprepared for the future.
Where they are being properly delivered, needs-based school reforms are already making a big difference in our classrooms – improving results and changing lives.
They are simply too important to abandon.
To deliver an education system that provides students with the skills they need for the jobs of the future, Labor will implement the Gonski agreements on time and in full and reverse Malcolm Turnbull’s cuts.
POSITIVE POLICY
Your Child. Our Future: Support for Students with Disability
Better Support For Students With Disability and Additional Learning Needs
All students – including students with disability – deserve a great education.
When students with disability do not have the right support, it not only impacts their learning, but can make it difficult for teachers to meet the needs of the class as a whole.
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver better support for students with disability, so they can reach their potential and succeed at school.
The Your Child. Our Future plan will provide $570 million in additional support for students with disability and additional learning needs by 2019, compared to the Liberals.
This will make a real difference, and will mean more allied health support – such as speech pathologists or occupational therapists, more individual attention, and more early intervention.
Autism Hubs and Dyslexia-Friendly Schools
Labor’s plan will build the capacity of schools to meet individual student needs, including through establishing Autism Hubs in each State and Territory.
Autism Hubs will provide advice on the most effective and inclusive ways to help students with autism, deliver professional development and in-class coaching for teachers, as well as link parents and families to health and specialist services in the community.
A network of Dyslexia Friendly Schools will be created across Australia, with participating schools certified for their capacity to deliver best-practice programs in inclusive education.
Tackling bullying
No-one deserves to be bullied and to miss out on educational opportunities because they are different.
Students with disability are up to three times more likely to be bullied than their peers.
Labor will establish a national approach to reducing the bullying of students with disability, and will make sure every school has anti-bullying strategies in place that protect students with disability.
School upgrades and learning technology
Labor’s plan will ensure more students with disability will get the chance to participate fully in learning and school activities, by supporting school communities so they can purchase assistive technology and improve school buildings.
Labor will invest $30 million so that from 2017: At least 3,000 grants of up to $5,000 will be available for schools to invest in equipment and technology to support learning for students with disability.
At least 500 grants of up to $30,000 will be available for minor capital works so students can access school facilities and be properly included in school activities.
Boosting teacher skills and the curriculum
More teachers will be supported to become experts in supporting students with disability and extra learning needs, with Labor investing $40 million for up to 2,000 teachers to complete a Masters in Inclusive Education.
The development of a new curriculum for students with disability will be fast-tracked so students with disability get the same learning opportunities as their peers.
POSITIVE POLICY
Your Child, Our Future. Non-Govt School funding support
Labor has announced that as part of the “Your Child. Our Future” plan, a Labor Government will provide $82 million to Independent schools associations and Catholic education commissions for the duration of the original six-year Gonski agreements.
This means an additional two years of funding, and honours the agreements Labor entered into with the non-government schools sectors.
This will be called the Teaching and Learning Support Program.
The funding will allow the non-government school associations to continue important work to implement the Gonski reforms such as: Provide better coaching for teachers
Establishing centres of excellence for the teaching of STEM
Employing School Leadership Consultants – to work with principals to make sure schools have a school improvement agenda in place to lift student outcomes
Supporting schools to implement the Australian Curriculum;
Best practice professional development to support Indigenous Independent Schools
Of course, we will expect transparency and accountability for this funding – with clear links to improved teaching and learning.
POSITIVE POLICY
More Affordable Child Care
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver child care support that is fairer and will make early education and care more affordable for families.
Our package will give parents the early education and care relief they need now – from 1 January 2017.
Under Labor’s plan: Low and middle income families will benefit from an increase to the Child Care Benefit of 15 per cent.
Every one of the 813,000 families that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off – an increase up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per year, will provide much needed relief for the family budget.
The annual cap on the Child Care Rebate will be increased from $7,500 to $10,000 per child, leaving families up to $2,500 per child per year better off.
107,800 families who would otherwise reach the Child Care Rebate cap this financial year won’t have to choose between paying double fees, or dropping out of the workforce.
Labor’s plan will take pressure off the family budget, help grow the economy by keeping more parents in work and ensure that all children continue to have access to two days of vital early education.
Better early education and care is essential to a growing economy – in the short-term and the long-term.
It’s central to Labor’s plan for fairer growth, real jobs and greater opportunities.
Families who rely on early education and care need a better deal now - and that's what Labor will deliver.
Labor’s plan also includes: Cracking down on unjustified price increases – New transparency and accountability standards, along with extra powers to investigate unjustified price increases and stop price gouging.
Supporting flexible Family Day Care – Investing an additional $50 million to support improvements to the Family Day Care system, including flexible options for families and enhancing the education, investigation and compliance programs.
Better services for Indigenous children and children in remote areas –Increasing support for children in Budget Base Funded Services by 15 per cent, in line with the increase to the Child Care Benefit.
Valuing our early education workforce - $150 million investment towards developing the early education workforce – developing a new Early Years’ Workforce Strategy, and establishing a national Educator Professional Development Program.
Labor will also make submissions to the Fair Work Commission proceedings in support of professional wages for early childhood educators.
Before the last election, the Liberals promised to make child care more affordable for Australian families.
But over the last three years, child care fees have increased by over 20 per cent, and out-of-pocket costs have gone up.
According to research by the ANU’s Centre for Social Research and Methods, one in three families would be worse off under the Liberals’ proposed child care changes.
Families won’t be worse off under Labor’s changes.
In government, Labor will not proceed with the Liberals’ child care changes in their current form, because of the number of families that will be worse off, the unfair activity test and the impact on vulnerable children.
While we work with experts and the sector to formalise the very best long-term reforms, Labor recognises that families need action and support now – they should not have to wait any longer.
Labor has a proud history of early education reform, and we are driven to build on this platform.
Early education and care isn’t a form of babysitting – it is critical for parent’s workforce participation and for children’s development.
Only Labor will put families first.
POSITIVE POLICY
A Stronger Vocational Education & Training Sector
A Shorten Labor Government will undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to build a stronger VET sector and weed out dodgy providers and student rip-offs.
Despite its importance to Australia’s social and economic future, Australia’s VET sector is at a crossroads.
Costs are increasing but quality is declining, particularly in private courses and states which have experienced funding reductions.
Labor’s review will ensure the VET sector is properly equipped to train Australians for the jobs of the future, proper standards are enforced and the central role of our public TAFE system is recognised.
Our national skills and training sector used to be the envy of the world – since the election of the Liberal Government it has been significantly damaged by shonks and sharks ripping off vulnerable people.
People’s livelihoods are being destroyed – and their job prospects ruined.
It is a disgrace – and action must be taken.
Having a strong VET sector is an important part of Labor’s plan to tackle inequality.
The vocational education and training sector deserves a comprehensive, evidence-based approach to policy-making to ensure it is fit for the critical task of preparing Australians for the jobs of the future.
While schools and universities have had full reviews into funding with the Gonski and Bradley reviews – the vocational education and training sector has been left behind.
The sector has not undergone a full review since the Kangan Report in 1974.
It is time for a full review of the operation of the sector including quality, funding and access.
As new jobs emerge and existing industries go through extensive restructuring the nation will rely on an effective, quality vocational sector to provide the qualifications to enable people to enter the workforce, upskill or retrain.
Billions of dollars have been wasted due to the Liberals refusal to act on the escalating VET FEE-HELP crisis with VET FEE-HELP loans escalating from $699 million in 2013 to $1.7 billion in 2014 and is expected to have blown out to over $3 billion for 2015.
To date, Labor has put forward a number of plans to guarantee funding for TAFE and to implement strong and sensible measures to stop the shonks and sharks in the private sector.
This adds to the announcement last year that a Shorten Labor Government would guarantee TAFE funding into the future by working with Premiers and Chief Ministers on a comprehensive National Priority Plan that defines the role of TAFE and places it squarely as the public provider within the VET sector.
There is abundant evidence that the vocational training sector must be underpinned by a dominant and viable public provider.
Labor is committed to protecting the reputation of the sector, prioritising the outcomes for students and meeting the national need for a well-trained workforce into the future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Computer Coding For Every School
Labor believes that coding is the literacy of the 21st Century, and every young Australian should be able to read and write the global language of the digital age.
Digital proficiency will be a foundation skill, as important as reading and numeracy.
It will increasingly determine Australians employment prospects and the opportunities available to them in the workplace.
The Australian Workforce Productivity Agency predicts that in 2025 there could be an undersupply of qualifications for key ICT occupations, with employment projected to grow between 64 and 72 per cent faster than overall employment growth, and account for around 5 per cent of all employment in 2025.
Australia needs to elevate technology to the status of literacy and numeracy in the National Curriculum so that it is taught from the beginning of formal learning by a more coding-literate teaching workforce.
That’s why a Labor Government will ensure that computer programming and digital technologies – coding – is taught in every primary and secondary Australian school, by a teacher who has had the opportunity to receive training in coding.
We will work with the states and territories, teaching bodies, school systems and the Australian Curriculum and Reporting Authority (ACARA) to examine ways to lift the status of coding to a core skill that is part of learning from the start of schooling.
Labor’s plan is that by 2020 computer programming and digital technologies – coding – is taught in every primary and secondary Australian school.
We will also invest $9 million to establish a National Coding in Schools centre (NCIS) so that all teachers in Australia have the opportunity to develop their skills, and every student can have access to exciting ways to learn coding.
NCIS will collaborate and link with industry and experts to develop the materials and content to support coding in schools.
To ensure teachers and students benefit from cutting edge virtual programs that set students up for success at school and in the workplace NCIS will: Develop and promote innovative teaching of coding in our schools; ensuring teachers in every school gain access to practical hands on training in coding and its integration into the classroom;
Partner with business and industry leaders to connect the teaching of coding in schools to help establish a culture of innovation and creativity while equipping students with the skills that will be in-demand in the future, including hands-on experience;
Provide ongoing engagement with teachers across the country to support the integration of coding into their teaching with confidence.
As our economy responds to technological change, it is vital all Australians have the skills to be able to participate – to secure good jobs today and well into the future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Skilling Teachers in STEM - Upskilling Teachers
Experts predict that in the years to come, 75 per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM).
But we know that unless students are interested and engaged in STEM at an early age, they are unlikely to pursue a career in those fields.
Currently this isn’t the case, with more children dropping out of STEM subjects with every additional year of study.
This partly reflects the way STEM subjects are taught, but it also happens because our teachers aren’t properly supported to engage young peoples’ natural curiosity.
This is now an urgent issue that requires immediate action.
Nationally, around 60 per cent of IT teachers and 40 per cent of General Science and maths teachers teaching Years 7-10 classes do not have a tertiary qualification in those areas.
We need to do more to support Australia’s great teachers so that they can deliver STEM courses in a way that will inspire and engage young Australians.
Labor has a two-part plan to upskill teachers as an urgent priority, and create a pipeline of future STEM qualified teachers to join the teaching ranks.
Labor will establish a five year STEM teacher training fund that will support 5,000 primary and secondary teachers a year to undertake professional development in STEM disciplines.
Coding and programming will be a key focus of this program.
The training fund will ensure the upskilling of around 25,000 existing STEM teachers in primary and secondary education, with these teachers taking their new skills straight to the classroom.
These grants will back our teachers to do what they do best, with the skills and training they need.
The grants will be flexible and will allow teachers to work with their schools in determining the best form of professional development.
Labor will work with teaching bodies, TAFEs and State Governments to develop criteria for access to the scheme and the eligible courses and uses of the grants.
We will invest $127 million in reskilling teachers over four years, kicking off in the 2017 school year.
POSITIVE POLICY
Girls Into Code
Australia has a chronic shortage of women graduating with computer science or coding skills.
Since 2001, the rate of women enrolling in an IT degree has actually fallen from about 1 in 4 to just 1 in 10.
Continuing to see women fall behind in IT will limit our capacity for all Australians to capture and embrace the opportunities of the digital economy, let alone meet the projected demand for ICT skills across industry.
The lack of diversity will also begin to affect our ability to innovate as a nation.
On top of that, women could be left out economically, shut out from influential positions in industry and government due to lack of relevant skills and experience.
This will perpetuate the gender gap in Australian IT in which currently: Only 28 per cent of workers in the ICT are women
Only 1 in 5 tech entrepreneurs are women.
It is therefore crucial that young women learn to code and consider careers in ICT as early as possible, so that they have a stake in the digital economy of the future.
That is why Labor will launch Girls into Code – a $4.5 million grants program to support organisations that promote, encourage and inspire girls to learn code.
Improving rates of participation by women in technology jobs involves capturing girls’ interest early, by providing opportunities for them to experience the creative side of ICT as through Carnegie Mellon’s Alice and MIT’s Scratch initiatives.
It is also important to highlight role models and demonstrate diverse career paths from a young age, while moving away from stereotypes.
Labor’s Girls into Code grants program will facilitate mentoring and access to role models, connect coding programs to schools, and create opportunities for girls to build up their confidence and showcase their talent in coding and ICT skills.
There are a range of organisations and movements that are doing great work delivering engaging and inclusive programs that inspire young women and girls to code, including Code Club Australia, Code Like a Girl, DigiGirlz and Girls Make Games.
Labor’s Girls into Code will ensure these programs are offered in more places, to more girls so that in the future Australian women are just as equipped to benefit from the jobs of the future as men will be.
POSITIVE POLICY
National TAFE Funding Guarantee
Under the Abbott-Turnbull Government, Australia’s TAFEs are struggling.
In the past two years we have seen the closures of TAFEs, reductions in staffing, ever-increasing course costs and unscrupulous private providers and brokers preying on vulnerable people.
This must not be allowed to continue.
TAFE must be backed by governments as it is critical to our future.
Labor has a plan to back TAFE into the future by developing a comprehensive National Priority Plan that defines the unique role of TAFE as our public provider and delivers on this by working with the states and territories to provide ongoing guaranteed TAFE funding.
TAFE must remain an essential part of Australia’s skills and training sector as it plays a vital role in servicing our regions, industries in transition and disadvantaged groups.
As the Australian economy changes, the jobs of the future will change.
Our trades will involve more technology-based skills, and workers will need training in these skills to be more effective in the workplace and to remain competitive in the employment market.
New trades and professions will emerge and require quality training programs and upskilling courses.
It is therefore absolutely critical that we invest in supporting our national asset – our public TAFE sector.
There are challenges in the way the vocational educational sector is funded which has led to the decline of the TAFE sector nationally.
Over the last year it has become clear that there has been a failure in the market and we have seen the proliferation of opportunistic and sub-standard training providers costing the taxpayers and students millions of dollars.
This needs to stop.
Under Labor’s plan for TAFE, a Shorten Labor Government will work with Premiers and Chief Ministers on a comprehensive National Priority Plan that defines the unique role of TAFE and places it squarely as the public provider within the VET sector – as the cornerstone of our economy’s need to train and retrain its workforce and deliver on improving the participation, productivity, innovation and growth efforts required for the nation.
The Turnbull Government has been silent on TAFE and now it appears they are considering abandoning the VET sector completely to the States.
This would seriously undermine the national effort required to support growth and jobs through nationally coordinated skills development.
In comparison, Labor is firmly committed to a strong TAFE sector.
We understand how critically important TAFE is to so many students, communities, industries and businesses.
It is a national asset and we must work across all levels of government to ensure its future.
POSITIVE POLICY
New Graduates into STEM Teaching
Experts predict that in the years to come, 75 per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM).
But we know that unless students are interested and engaged in STEM at an early age, they are unlikely to pursue a career in those fields.
Currently this isn’t the case, with more children dropping out of STEM subjects with every additional year of study.
This partly reflects the way STEM subjects are taught, but it also happens because our teachers aren’t properly supported to engage young peoples’ natural curiosity.
This is now an urgent issue that requires immediate action.
Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships over five years to new and recent graduates of STEM degrees to encourage them to continue their study and become a STEM teacher.
A STEM degree is the best background for teaching STEM in our schools, as people with qualifications and a passion for these subjects will be better able to connect with young Australians and engage them in their studies.
Labor’s Teach STEM initiative will provide an incentive payment to attract more STEM graduates to become teachers.
Students that have just completed a STEM degree, or graduated within five years, will be able apply for the incentive payments.
The payment of $15,000 will be structured so that $5,000 is paid upon commencement of the course of study, with the remaining paid after their first year in the classroom.
This initiative will increase the attractiveness of STEM teaching careers and boost the number of qualified STEM teachers in Australian classrooms.
Labor will invest $133 million over four years to deliver our Teach STEM program.
Labor wants to upskill teachers and attract more STEM-qualified people into teaching because we understand that targeted investment across the education system to improve skills and drive innovation is vital to unlocking this country’s most important resource: the creativity and genius of Australia’s people.
POSITIVE POLICY
Investing in Indigenous Students
A Shorten Labor Government will invest an additional $100 million to support Indigenous students to succeed at school, and boost the number of Indigenous teachers.
This is part of Labor’s plan to help close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students.
Currently, the gap between outcomes for Indigenous and non-Indigenous students is unacceptably high.
Indigenous students are still:Twice as likely to be developmentally vulnerable in their first year of school.
Up to two years behind at school.
Behind non-Indigenous students’ NAPLAN results.
Less likely to complete Year 12.
This is just not good enough.
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan will make sure that Indigenous students get the targeted support we know makes a difference to their education.
Schools and educators will be able to put in place targeted strategies to close the gap, including: Early intervention literacy and numeracy programs.
Breakfast clubs.
Attendance, parenting and family support programs.
Targeted professional development and training for teachers.
One-on-one tutoring and mentoring.
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future will see an additional $96 million go towards improving outcomes for Indigenous students around Australia over school years 2018 and 2019.
In addition, Labor will provide $4.8 million over the forward estimates to fund 100 scholarships per year for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students, and increase the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander teachers.
Increasing the number of Indigenous teachers is critical to improving the educational outcomes of Indigenous students.
Indigenous teachers are significantly under-represented in schools.
While Indigenous students comprise 5 per cent of the total school student population, they only represent approximately 1 per cent of the teaching community.
Labor is committed to efforts to close the gap in Indigenous disadvantage – and education is key.
Mr Turnbull’s decision to dump the Gonski reforms and rip $29 billion out of schools will mean that students who need the most help are not getting the resources and support they need to succeed at school.
Only Labor will put people first – and support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students with the investment they need to achieve their best.
Funding for the $96 million in targeted support for Indigenous students formed part of Labor’s Your Child. Our Future package announced on 28 January 2016.
Labor’s Indigenous teacher scholarships program is offset from Labor’s announced improvements to the Budget.
POSITIVE POLICY
Targeted Teaching
A Shorten Labor Government will make sure school funding is conditional on evidence-based learning programs which are proven to increase student results.
Labor will also provide $4.6 million to expand the use of Targeted Teaching – using accurate information about what students actually understand, and what they are ready to learn next.
This will put Australian students on the right track to meet Labor’s target for our schools to be back in the top five internationally for reading, maths and science by 2025.
Targeted Teaching is about recognising that a one-size-fits-all approach to the classroom does not achieve the best results, and backing our educators in their hard work to support every student.
It means catching students before they fall too far behind, and making sure students who are ahead are still challenged to reach their full potential.
It also requires educators to assess their own teaching, keep what is working and change what is not.
Labor’s plan recognises that every dollar of taxpayer funds should be going toward programs which actually make a difference in the classroom.
Labor will immediately invest $4.6 million to identify the most effective Targeted Teaching resources, and develop guidance and support so schools and teachers can make the changes we need in the classroom.
Australian trials show Targeted Teaching has the potential to improve the proportion of students meeting early primary learning benchmarks in disadvantaged schools by up to 20 per cent.
Schools and school systems will be expected to have a proven strategy to lift student results.
Labor’s needs-based Your Child. Our Future plan will mean schools have the resources at the local level to support the implementation of programs like Targeted Teaching – with Labor investing $3.8 billion more in our schools than Mr Turnbull in 2018 and 2019 alone.
Labor has made education a priority because we know it is critical to Australia’s future economy.
You can’t have a plan for economic growth if you don’t have a plan to invest in education.
The choice for families is clear this election.
A vote for Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberals is a vote for a $50 billion tax cut for big business.
A vote for Bill Shorten and Labor is a vote for strong schools.
POSITIVE POLICY
Supporting Country Classrooms
Despite one in three Australians living outside our capital cities, there is a clear educational divide between the city and the country.
Across all tested year levels, students from regional and remote Australia score lower in NAPLAN.
More students in regional Australia also drop out of school, with year 12 retention rates significantly lower than in major cities.
Labor believes the future success of regional students and communities relies on a strong education system that will equip students in country schools with the skills they need to get the jobs of the future.
If Australia is to have a strong economic future, we need to make sure every student in regional and country Australia is prepared for high-skill, high-wage jobs.
Labor’s policy will ensure every child growing up outside our capital cities has the opportunity to achieve their full potential at school, and that the long-standing divide in educational achievement is closed.
Labor will invest an additional $1.8 billion in regional and country classrooms as part of the Your Child. Our Future plan for Australian schools.
Under Labor’s plan to fund the Gonski reforms on-time and in-full, students outside our capital cities will have the same opportunities to learn the skills they need to succeed.
Labor’s new school funding for our regions will benefit 1.5 million students during 2018 and 2019.
This extra support will mean more individualised support and attention for regional students, better early literacy and numeracy programs and better professional development for our teachers.
POSITIVE POLICY
Addressing The Child Care Squeeze
The struggle to secure early education and care places has been completely ignored by the Liberals.
Many parents face long and frustrating waiting lists to access early education and care services – with the current arrangements limiting work options for parents.
This isn’t only a battle before children reach school.
Parents needing Outside School Hours Care can face long waiting lists, and may even find that services simply don’t exist in their area.
Long waiting lists also drive up early education and care costs – locking low and middle income families out of high demand areas.
They also lock vulnerable and disadvantaged children out of vital early learning, when they have the most to gain.
To help tackle waiting lists, Labor will: Invest $100 million over three years from 2017-18 so services in areas of very high demand can expand – creating more places where families need them.
We will target areas of high or rapidly growing demand, with waiting lists in the local area, and priority will be given to community and not-for-profit services which would otherwise not be able to expand.
Commit $63.2 million over three years from 2017-18 to establish or expand up to 1,200 Outside School Hours Care services. Grants of up to $50,000 will be made available.
Services must be in areas of high demand, have waiting lists or be in areas where Outside School Hours Care is currently not available.
Families who rely on child care need a better deal now – and that's what Labor will deliver.
The Liberals have done nothing for 1,000 days in government other than make early education and care more expensive for families – and they have no plans at all to deal with waiting lists or expand Outside School Hours Care.
As well as tackling waiting lists, Labor will boost the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent and increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 per child per year from 1 January 2017.
Labor’s plan for better early education and care is essential to a growing economy.
It’s central to Labor’s plan for fairer growth, real jobs and greater opportunities.
POSITIVE POLICY
Real Skills, Good Jobs
Labor won’t let Australians fall behind because there is a gap between the skills they have and the ones employers are looking for.
We will help more unemployed young people into apprenticeships by creating 10,000 new Apprentice Ready places and see retrenched workers gain formal recognition of their skills through 5,000 accelerated apprenticeships so they can find their next job.
We are backing apprenticeships because we believe every Australian should have the chance to gain real skills and a good job.
Together, the creation of these 15,000 places represents a $62.5 million investment in jobs and training for Australians who are struggling to get into work.
POSITIVE POLICY
Safe Schools: Supporting LGBTI Students
Every Australian student deserves to be treated with respect and dignity at school – so they can learn free from bullying and discrimination.
Unfortunately, school is still a very difficult place for far too many LGBTI Australians: Eighty per cent of LGBTI students face verbal abuse and bullying at school.
Only one in five LGBTI students attend a school where they feel supported.
LGBTI young Australians are six times more likely to die from suicide, with bullying and exclusion major factors in suicide attempts.
Labor funded the national rollout of the Safe Schools program in 2013 to address the serious issues of bullying and poor mental health among young LGBTI Australians.
Every time bullying occurs in our schools, it distracts students from their learning and saps them of their potential.
Already, 545 schools with over 400,000 students have chosen to take part in the program HYPERLINK "http://www.100positivepolicies.org.au/safe_schools_supporting_lgbti_students" \l "_ftn4" [4].
Safe Schools is supported by Beyond Blue, The Black Dog Institute and headspace.
Despite the Liberals’ initial support for Safe Schools, Malcolm Turnbull has caved in to the extreme elements of his backbench and cut funding for the program from 2017.
This coincides with his unnecessary, damaging and divisive plebiscite on marriage equality – which will only make life harder for young Australians coming to terms with their sexuality.
Labor will invest $6 million over three years from 2017-18 to continue the Safe Schools program and support the Foundation for Young Australians to keep working with school communities to reduce bullying and discrimination.
Labor will work with schools and experts to make sure the program is based on the most effective strategies to reduce bullying, includes best-practice parental engagement and meets the needs of young Australians.
Labor will implement the program in line with the findings of the independent review.
Labor will put the interests of vulnerable young Australians facing bulling and discrimination first.
POSITIVE POLICY
Reducing Admission Fees To Questacon
For 30 years, Questacon has been exciting adults and children, and inspiring the scientists, researchers and engineers of tomorrow.
Questacon is Australia’s premier science museum, attracting 454,251 visitors and 136,155 school groups in 2015 alone.
While Questacon is attracting more visitors than ever, families under pressure from tight budgets and stagnant wages are missing out.
Current admission prices are adults $23.50, children $17.50 (children under four are admitted for free) and annual membership $160 (for the first year or $127.50 for renewing family memberships).
That means a day visit for a family of two adults and two children comes to a total of $82.
Labor believes that sparking the curiosity of young people and inspiring an interest in science and engineering isn’t just something that benefits the individual, it is something that benefits the nation.
If we are to be an innovation nation, powered by the strength of our ideas, we need to expand access to inspiring institutions like Questacon.
While simply lowering admission fees will allow more visitors, in particular from lower socio-economic backgrounds, any reduction in Questacon admission prices will reduce revenue while increasing costs through additional visitation impacting on cleaning, exhibition maintenance and staff numbers required to maintain safety and security.
That is why lowering admission prices will require action from government, which is the largest source of revenue for Questacon.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will act to improve the accessibility of Questacon for all Australians.
Labor’s plan
A Shorten Labor Government will support Questacon to lower admission fees for all visitors by $7.50. This will bring adult admission prices to $16 and a child admission to $10.
A $7.50 reduction in the per person admission price would impact Questacon by approximately a $3.675 million per year loss in revenue.
This factors in an increase in visitor numbers but not the increased operational costs associated with the reduction.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide additional financing to Questacon of $3.7 million per year ($14.8 million over the forward estimates) to allow for a reduction in admission fees without a loss to the services provided by Questacon.
Labor believes that all children and adults, regardless of their background, should have the opportunity to be inspired by the exhibitions at Questacon, whether they be Canberra locals or visitors to our national capital.
A Shorten Labor Government will make sure more do.
Making health our #1 priority: protecting Medicare, investing in our health system
Labor gave Australians Medicare and we will always protect it.
We believe all Australians should be able to access healthcare when and where they need it. That is what drives Labor’s health policy.
POSITIVE POLICY
A Stronger Medicare For All Australians
Labor will ensure that access to health care is determined by your Medicare card, and not your credit card, and will reverse the Turnbull Government’s GP Tax by stealth.
Nobody wants to head down the same path as America when it comes to our health system.
That’s why a Shorten Labor Government will restore indexation of the Medicare Benefits Schedule from 1 January 2017.
This will apply to all services provided by GPs, allied health and other health practitioners and medical specialists.
We will oppose Mr Turnbull’s cuts which will reduce bulk billing and hit Australian families every time they visit the doctor, every time they have an X-Ray, every time their buy essential medicines.
Labor created Medicare and Labor will always protect Medicare.
Having failed three times to introduce its GP Tax – due to Labor’s opposition in the Senate – the Liberals imposed a GP Tax by stealth, freezing the indexation of the rebates paid to doctors for four years.
Then in his first Budget, Malcolm Turnbull ripped another $925 million out of Medicare by extending the freeze by a further two years to 2020.
All Australians should be able to access health care when and where they need it.
That’s what drives Labor’s health policy.
In contrast, Medicare is under attack from Mr Turnbull and the Liberals.
They have made no secret they want us all to pay more to see the doctor and the indexation freeze will ensure this happens.
Mr Turnbull’s only plans for Medicare are to cut bulk billing and to privatise it.
Doctors have confirmed the extension of the GP Tax by stealth in Mr Turnbull’s Budget will be the tipping point to make bulk billing unviable for many practices.
Existing co-payments will be increased.
Everyone will pay more and the sickest, the poorest and those in rural areas will be hit hardest.
President of the Australian Medical Association, Professor Brian Owler, estimates that this will likely cost patients up to $20 more for each GP visit
One in 20 Australians already say they delay visiting their GP, or do not visit at all, because of cost.
This can lead to conditions deteriorating and people being admitted to hospital – meaning worse outcomes for the patient and greater cost to the health system.
It is vital we don’t create barriers for anyone who needs to see their GP.
The Liberals’ assault on Medicare and universal healthcare must stop.
All Australians should be able to access healthcare when and where they need it.
Only Labor can be trusted to make this happen.
Labor’s policy has been costed independently by the Parliamentary Budget Office and will have an impact of $2.4 billion over the forward estimates (to 2019-20), and $12.2 billion over the decade to 2026-27.
Labor will fund this policy through announced improvements to the Budget, including not proceeding with the new baby bonus, capping VET FEE HELP loans, and not proceeding with the tax cut for multinational companies.
POSITIVE POLICY
Better Mental Health Care
Labor believes that long term mental health reform focused on delivering a more integrated, cross-sector and whole-of-government mental health care system must be a national priority but it requires national leadership.
A Shorten Labor Government will build on Labor’s strong legacy in mental health by ensuring investment goes to where it is needed most.
Labor’s commitment to strengthening support for people with mental illness and improving mental wellbeing starts with the recommendations of the National Mental Health Commission.
Labor largely supports the National Mental Health Commission’s recommendations and will outline our priorities for implementation within the first 100 days of a Shorten Labor Government.
In addition, a Shorten Labor Government is committed to making sure people with mental illness and their carers continue to be supported as the National Disability Insurance Scheme is rolled out and through the continuation of community based mental health services.
We will work towards improving the lives of those that are the most disadvantaged and we will not forget people living in regional, rural, and remote areas of Australia.
We also recognise that the pressures faced by Australia’s small business owners and operators, as well as those in farming, can lead to poorer mental health and well-being.
We know that regionally delivered and funded services can help to build community resilience through early intervention and the prevention of mental illness.
Our efforts will also focus on preventing the tragedy of suicide by identifying and addressing the causes of suicide and providing services and support which target the people most at risk.
A Shorten Labor Government will commit to the National Mental Health Commission’s target to reduce suicides by 50 per cent over the next ten years.
Labor will establish 12 regional initiatives – six urban, four regional and two remote - as the first stage in implementation of a comprehensive, whole of system approach to suicide prevention.
Regions will apply for grants to fund place-based initiatives tailored to local community needs for services and support.
We will work with stakeholders and State and Territory Governments to identify these sites within the first 100 days of government.
Labor’s plan will build on our historic investment in mental health in a way that ensures the sustainability and effectiveness of Australia’s mental health system for the long term.
POSITIVE POLICY
Medicinal Cannabis
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure patients who are suffering from a terminal illness or other serious medical conditions will be allowed access to safe, reliable and legal medicinal cannabis if prescribed by their Doctor.
There are thousands of Australians who are suffering from unbearable pain, muscle spasticity from conditions like multiple sclerosis and nausea resulting from chemotherapy who may benefit from medicinal cannabis.
No one can imagine how horrific it must be for someone to see their child, partner or parent in immense pain, knowing relief is available but illegal.
If we can do something to help people suffering immense pain from debilitating and life threatening conditions - then why on earth wouldn’t we?
There are too many stories of people suffering – and this is unacceptable in a modern society.
With the governments of New South Wales and Victoria pushing ahead with state-based schemes and Queensland joining those states in taking part in clinical trials, it is no longer tenable for the Federal Government to bury its head in the sand.
Only the Commonwealth Government can ensure there is a national scheme which ensures equity of access and a safe and reliable supply and Labor will work with the states and territories to enact it.
Action at the national level is needed because a person’s access to a product that can relieve suffering should not be dictated by the vagaries of which state or territory they live in.
POSITIVE POLICY
Indigenous Eye Health Help
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $9.5 million to close the gap in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander vision loss.
Labor is committed to closing the gap in eye health and vision loss between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and other Australians.
Shockingly, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults are six times more likely to suffer from blindness.
However, 94 per cent of this vision loss is either preventable or treatable.
Addressing vision loss alone would account for around 11 per cent of the gap in health outcomes between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and other Australians.
Australia is the only developed nation where the infectious and wholly preventable eye disease of trachoma still exists at endemic levels.
And it only exists among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples – where it is endemic in two out of three remote communities.
Leaders such as the Vision 2020 alliance of health organisations, including Fred Hollows Foundation and the Indigenous Eye Health Unit at the University of Melbourne are making great progress in improving Indigenous eye health.
Labor is determined to do more to support their great efforts and ensure that we finish the job and eliminate trachoma across the country.
Equitable access to specialist and general eye health care services is critical to reducing high rates of preventable blindness among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
However, there is a significant unmet need – around 35 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults have never had an eye exam.
Labor will deliver additional funding to increase visiting optometry services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to address the gap in general eye health.
Labor will also increase funding for ophthalmology services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to address the gap in specialist eye health care service delivery.
To continue to drive progress towards the elimination of trachoma in Australia, Labor will invest in trachoma prevention activities recommended by the World Health Organisation.
With Labor’s additional funding we can eliminate trachoma from Australia by 2020 and begin to turn the tide on this endemic health problem.
POSITIVE POLICY
Managing Allergic Diseases
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $1.1 million to better manage allergic diseases and their associated health risks.
Allergic diseases are among the fastest-growing chronic diseases in Australia with one in five Australians suffering from food and drug allergies, asthma, hay fever and other allergic diseases.
Sadly, the evidence is we are not managing allergic diseases well.
If not managed properly, allergic diseases can lead to anaphylaxis – severe, life-threatening allergic reactions and over the last 20 years hospital admissions for anaphylaxis have soared 400 per cent.
This also adds to the pressure on our health and hospitals system and properly managing allergic diseases would reduce avoidable emergency department presentations and expensive drug prescriptions.
A Shorten Labor Government will give allergic diseases the attention and funding they deserve through this $1.1 million commitment over three years to improve management of allergic diseases.
Labor’s investment will fund the Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy and Anaphylaxis Australia to: Improve allergy management for young Australians: Teens and young adults are at a higher risk of fatal anaphylaxis.
But the resources available to help them manage their allergies are insufficient.
Labor’s investment will allow the peak allergy organisations to consult with young Australians on their needs, then develop resources to help them manage their conditions and prevent more serious harm.
Educate the food industry on food allergies: There is no standardised, easy way for food service providers to learn about food allergies.
This makes it harder for Australians with food allergies to eat outside their homes, and has in some cases led to food-induced anaphylaxis and deaths.
Labor’s commitment will help educate food providers about food risks and mitigations, via roundtables and an online training course.
Standardise management of drug allergy: There is no standard way to manage drug allergies in Australia, and a patchwork of approaches has emerged.
In some cases drug allergies are not diagnosed or communicated, meaning they are not properly managed in settings including hospitals.
In other cases drug allergies are ‘over diagnosed’, increasing waiting times for allergy specialists and the use of more expensive antibiotic medications.
Labor’s commitment will fund a range of activities, such as the development of new processes and protocols, to standardise drug allergy management.
Labor’s $1.1 million investment in Managing Allergic Diseases is further proof only Labor believes all Australians, no matter where they live or how much they earn, are entitled to the best possible health care, not the best possible health care they can afford.
POSITIVE POLICY
Fight Smoking Related Diseases
Tobacco consumption continues to have serious health and economic impacts for individuals, their families and society.
Each year in Australia tobacco still kills more than 15,000 people and has more than $31.5 billion in health and economic costs.
Results from the 2013 National Drug Strategy Household Survey show approximately 12.8 per cent of Australians - or around 2.5 million people - smoke daily.
The costs of smoking also continue to weigh down on the economy and on the budget through its adverse health effects and associated costs to the healthcare system.
The $31.5 billion in economic and social costs is more than triple the amount of revenue raised by the Commonwealth from tobacco excise, which stood at around $8.3 billion for the last financial year.
A Shorten Labor Government will further curtail Australia’s biggest preventable cause of disease and death by raising tobacco excise to bring it in line with world’s best practice.
Labor will introduce four annual 12.5 per cent increases in excise on tobacco.
Following the four 12.5 per cent increases in excise, taxation as a proportion of the retail price of a packet of cigarettes will sit at around the World Health Organisation’s target of 75 per cent of the retail price.
Estimates suggest that in Australia these measures should lead to tens of thousands more Australians quitting smoking and that number again will smoke less than they otherwise would for every excise increase contained in this package.
After initially opposing this measure as “another tax grab”, Labor welcomes the Coalition’s inclusion of it in the 2016 Budget.
Only Labor can be trusted to take effective action to reduce smoking.
POSITIVE POLICY
Increase Support For Australians With Breast Cancer
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $7 million to support women with breast cancer in rural Australia and women all around Australia with secondary breast cancer.
Breast cancer is the most common cancer in Australian women, and the second-deadliest.
Despite the great advances of recent years, diagnoses of breast cancer are unrelenting – at a rate of 43 a day, 300 a week and more than 15,600 a year.
Secondary breast cancer occurs where the disease spreads to other parts of the body – like bones, the lungs, the liver or the brain.
While survival times are improving, secondary breast cancer is essentially incurable. It will kill 3,000 Australian mums, daughters, sisters and friends in 2016.
The Breast Cancer Network Australia (BCNA) is the peak consumer organisation for Australians affected by breast cancer and has more than 110,000 members across Australia.
Labor’s $7 million investment will enable BCNA to deliver improved support and information for women with secondary breast cancer and ongoing support for women with breast cancer in rural Australia.
Almost a third of Australian women with secondary breast cancer say they do not receive enough emotional support.
Another one in five women say they have unmet needs for information.
As part of this commitment, $4.4 million will be invested over four years to improve psychosocial support and information for women with secondary breast cancer.
With Labor’s support, BCNA will deliver: a telephone counselling service for women and their families staffed by oncology social workers; expanded access to specialist secondary breast cancer nurses; and better access to information through a digital platform.
Women who are diagnosed with breast cancer face particular challenges if they live in rural Australia.
They are likely to live further from vital health services, and also further from other women and supporters who can help them on their cancer journey.
Currently, BCNA provides specialised services and support in rural Australia, but under Malcolm Turnbull’s Government, these programs are set to expire in June 2017.
Labor’s commitment of $2.6 million over three years will extend the BCNA’s funding to 2020, allowing it to continue its vital services.
This commitment will also allow the BCNA to develop new programs – such as an app to help women with breast cancer across Australia.
Labor’s commitment will fund the continued distribution of the BCNA’s key resources – the My Journey Kit for women with early breast cancer and Hope & Hurdles for women with secondary breast cancer.
It will also connect women with information and each other through community forums and the BCNA’s Online Network.
Given the unique challenges of accessing support in rural Australia, these opportunities for women with breast cancer to support each other are vital –a Shorten Labor Government will ensure they continue.
POSITIVE POLICY
Support Men With Prostate Cancer
A Shorten Labor Government will provide greater support for men with prostate cancer and their families by committing $10.6 million to double the number of Prostate Cancer Specialist Nurses.
Prostate cancer is the most diagnosed cancer in Australia and our third most deadly cancer.
In 2016, more than 3,000 Australian men will die from prostate cancer, and 20,000 will be diagnosed with it.
The Prostate Cancer Specialist Nurses program provides vital assistance to these men and their families.
It places highly trained registered nurses in hospitals and other health settings.
They provide expert information and support – for example, by helping men access services outside hospitals and making their journey through our health system easier.
Labor’s $10.6 million commitment over three years will double the number of Prostate Cancer Specialist Nurses funded by the Federal Government to 28.
This will increase the total number of nurses around Australia to over 40, meeting unmet need.
Labor expects that its new commitment will give an additional 2,000 men each year access to a Prostate Cancer Specialist Nurse.
The new nurses funded by Labor will be assigned by the Prostate Cancer Foundation of Australia (PCFA), based on need.
According to Associate Professor Anthony Lowe, Chief Executive Officer of PCFA, the announcement gives hope that more Australian men affected by prostate cancer may have better access to this specialist service, especially in rural and regional Australia.
"We are pleased to hear that the Labor Party understands the importance of having the Prostate Cancer Specialist Nurses in the field and providing additional support to men and their families who are fighting prostate cancer,” said Associate Professor Lowe.
The Prostate Cancer Foundation of Australia created the Specialist Nurse program in 2012, with support from the Movember Foundation.
The former Labor Government expanded the Program with a $7 million commitment in 2013.
Labor’s investment doubled the number of nurses employed across Australia to the current level of 28.
But under Malcolm Turnbull’s leadership, the Liberals have not given the program the funding certainty it deserves and existing funding is set to expire in June 2017.
The program is particularly vulnerable because it’s financed from the Department of Health’s ‘Flexible Funds’ – which the Coalition has cut by around $1 billion, including almost $200 million in new cuts in Malcolm Turnbull’s 2016-17 Budget.
In contrast, a Shorten Labor Government will safeguard this crucial program with funding across the usual four-year Budget cycle, and expand its reach.
Labor’s investment to support men with prostate cancer is further proof that only Labor believes that all Australians, no matter where they live or how much they earn, are entitled to the best possible health care, not just the care they can afford.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor Will End Malcolm Turnbull’s Medicines Price Hike
Labor believes every Australian deserves access to affordable medicine.
For more than two years we have been fighting the Liberal Government’s unfair plan to drive up the cost of medicines and take this country down the path of the American health system.
Today we confirm that a Shorten Labor Government will scrap the Liberals’ medicines price hike and ensure healthcare remains affordable for every Australian.
In his horror 2014 Budget, Tony Abbott announced $1.3 billion in cuts to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), to be achieved by increasing co-payments and safety net thresholds.
This would see co-payments increase by $5 for general patients and by $0.80 for concessional patients.
The Liberals also plan to increase the PBS safety net thresholds each year for four years.
This would see the general safety net thresholds increase by 10 per cent a year, and the concessional safety nets rise by the cost of two prescriptions a year.
Malcolm Turnbull confirmed his commitment to these cuts by building them into his first budget earlier this month.
They would come on top of the existing annual indexation of copayments and safety net thresholds in line with the Consumer Price Index.
Labor will not stand by and let Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberals dismantle universal healthcare.
We will scrap the Liberals’ cuts to the PBS, ensuring there will be no increase to the co-payments or safety net thresholds on top of regular indexation.
This means that under Labor, medicines will be more affordable than under Malcolm Turnbull.
Under a Shorten Labor Government, all Australians will continue to have access to affordable medicines.
This will protect access for the most vulnerable – the poor, elderly and sick – who would be worst hit by the Liberals’ plans to cut the PBS.
Our plan to keep medicines affordable has been costed by the independent Parliamentary Budget Office at $971 million over the next four years, and $3.6 billion over the decade.
Together with our plan to end the Government’s GP Tax by stealth, today’s announcement confirms only Labor will protect universal healthcare – for today and for future generations.
POSITIVE POLICY
Reforming Australia’s Healthcare System
A Shorten Labor Government will establish a permanent Australian Healthcare Reform Commission to assist all levels of government to continuously improve our healthcare system.
Within the Commission, Labor will establish a new Centre for Medicare and Healthcare System Innovation.
The Centre will develop, trial, evaluate and implement new payment and service delivery models that aim to reduce health expenditure while improving the quality and safety of care.
The Centre will also take over the responsibilities of the MBS Review.
Unlike the Liberals, Labor commits to ensuring that where there are any savings realised, they will be reinvested by the Centre into healthcare system innovation including new models of primary care.
Labor has a long history of reforming Australia’s healthcare system for the benefit of all.
It is thanks to the work of successive Labor governments over the past 70 years that Australia boasts a world-class healthcare system.
But Australia’s healthcare system is under increasing strain.
Rising rates of chronic disease, an ageing population and the Turnbull Government’s reckless cuts are threatening the universality and sustainability of our system.
There are also growing health disparities within our population: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people experience a higher burden of ill health that is two and a half times that of other Australians.
A 2014 review of mental health programs and services found that distressed and vulnerable people are often dealing with a system that is difficult to navigate and doesn’t always consider their education, employment, housing, and physical health care needs.
People with physical disabilities and those who live in regional, rural and remote Australia continue to lag unacceptably behind.
Healthcare reform shouldn’t just be a term used by a government seeking to make cuts to healthcare.
If our healthcare system is to meet the changing and increasing healthcare needs of all Australians, we must have a continuing process of policy and program development, implementation, evaluation and monitoring.
Much like the successful National Health and Hospitals Commission, the new Commission will have a key advisory role.
It will investigate, develop and evaluate proposed changes to Australia’s health system, and advise governments (including State and Territory Governments) on these changes.
The Australian Healthcare Reform Commission will also have a strong implementation capacity.
It will be tasked to roll out agreed structural reforms to Australia’s healthcare system, including funding agreements and payment systems.
The Australian Healthcare Reform Commission will embed reform in Australia’s healthcare system, by focussing on: Preserving universality.
Reducing inequality.
Eliminating waste and duplication.
Integrating services.
Improving the collection and use of data and analytics.
The establishment of the Australian Healthcare Reform Commission and the Centre for Medicare and Healthcare System Innovation will ensure that we embed a constant process of reform in our healthcare, so that our world-class system can continue to meet the healthcare needs of Australians well into the future.
The Commission will be created through the consolidation of the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care, the National Health Funding Body, and functions formerly associated with the Australian National Preventive Health Agency, Independent Hospital Pricing Authority, National Health Performance Authority and Health Workforce Australia which have been transferred to other agencies.
POSITIVE POLICY
Stronger Medicare: New Models of Care
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, means that Australia requires new approaches to care.
Labor is committed to continuously improving Medicare so it will meet the health care needs of Australians into the future.
Labor will also provide an additional $100 million over two years to strengthen the frontline of Australia’s health care system – primary care.
Building a stronger primary care system will provide greater day to day health care for tens of thousands of Australians, meaning fewer people end up in hospital.
Labor’s investment will help develop new models of integrated primary care including the development of a unique Australian model of patient-centred medical homes – Your Family Doctor.
Labor will ensure an appropriate mix of launch sites in metropolitan, regional and rural areas, so that the models developed meet the needs of all Australians.
Labor will task the new Centre for Medicare and Healthcare System Innovation, within the permanent Australian Healthcare Reform Commission, with developing specific models of innovative primary care.
It will do so in partnership with general practitioners, nurses, Primary Health Networks, Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations, other primary care and allied health providers, consumers and other stakeholders.
This builds on our commitment to reverse Malcolm Turnbull’s GP Tax by stealth – his Medicare freeze - from 1 January 2017.
Only a Shorten Labor Government will protect Medicare and ensure our primary care system keeps up with Australia’s changing health care needs.
POSITIVE POLICY
Stronger Medicare: Strengthening Hospitals
Every Australian should have access to affordable, quality health care when and where they need it.
Hospitals are at the heart of Medicare: Australia’s world-class universal health care system.
A Shorten Labor Government will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and emergency departments, invest in hospitals and protect Medicare so Australia has the strong health system we need for the future.
Labor will also ramp up investment in health care at the frontline – so fewer Australians end up in hospital in the first place.
All Australians deserve access to the best possible health care when they need it – determined by their Medicare card, not their credit card.
That’s why a Shorten Labor Government will restore the National Health Reform Agreement for four years, at the originally agreed funding formula of 50 per cent of growth in costs based on the National Efficient Price, and provide additional support to the States and Territories to reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in public hospital emergency departments.
This will boost hospital funding by $2 billion more than the Liberals over the next four years, and drive efficiency by funding the States and Territories on the basis of the actual services performed.
This will mean reduced hospital waiting times, more beds, more doctors and nurses.
Hospitals that perform services more efficiently are able to use additional funding to invest in service improvement.
The Liberals went to the election promising no cuts to health – and then they inflicted savage cuts to our hospitals.
The Liberals scrapped Labor’s National Health Reform Agreement and returned to an outdated model of indexation, which saw cuts to hospitals across the country.
They have recently been forced to admit that Labor’s reforms were right all along – but failed to match Labor’s investment, committing just 45 per cent of growth in efficient costs.
While Labor’s new commitment does not restore all of the funding ripped out by the Liberals, it restores Labor’s agreement for the next four years and provides certainty for a new agreement to be negotiated under a Labor Government.
POSITIVE POLICY
An Age-Friendly Nation
A Shorten Labor Government will appoint a Minister for Ageing and develop a National Strategy for an Ageing Australia to ensure Australia becomes an age-friendly nation.
For Australia to realise the opportunities and meet the challenges presented by an ageing population, Government action is needed.
An age-friendly Australia needs to:  Have a whole-of-Government approach, under the direction of a dedicated Minister for Ageing.
Promote and support active ageing.
Undertake an independent, transparent and thorough review of the aged care reforms, with a focus on funding models.
Develop an aged care workforce strategy.
The Liberals see our ageing population as a burden rather than an opportunity.
They have not appointed a Minister for Ageing.
They have seen aged care as nothing but a savings option – cutting its funding in each of their Budgets – most recently $1.2 billion in the 2016 Budget.
Labor sees things very differently.
In 2012, Labor delivered one of the biggest reforms to aged care and ageing in a generation – the $3.7 billion, ten-year strategy known as the Living Longer, Living Better (LLLB) aged care package.
These reforms were designed to build a fairer, more sustainable and nationally consistent aged care system to meet the challenges of an ageing population.
Today, these reforms are delivering choice, easier access and better care for older Australians, their families and carers, while ensuring the aged care and services industry is equipped to deal with the dramatic growth in our ageing population.
But there is more to do.
A Shorten Labor Government will: Address ongoing problems in the My Aged Care gateway in the first 100 days of Government, in consultation with the aged care sector, consumers and medical and allied health providers.
Conduct an independent review of the LLLB reforms with a view to moving to greater flexibility, choice and consumer control by 1 July 2017, with a particular focus on the Aged Care Funding Instrument, following concerns raised by the sector and growing costs in this area.
Work with the aged care sector and unions to ensure we can meet the challenges of the increasing need for aged care workers, as well as career progression and conditions for this low paid and predominantly female workforce.
Establish the Active Ageing Fund to support programs to reduce the risk of dementia, prevent falls, improve physical activities and healthy lifestyles - enabling older Australians to age well in their own communities, at home and at work.
Labor believes that longer lives are one of the greatest achievements of the 20th Century, and that longevity will define the 21st Century.
Labor is committed to ensuring that Australia becomes an age-friendly nation.
POSITIVE POLICY
Supporting Australians To Die Well
New Approaches To Palliative Care
A Shorten Labor Government will help support Australians to exercise greater choice and control over how and where they live their final days by investing in new models of palliative care.
Right now, many Australians are not able to choose where and how they are cared for before they die.
According to the Grattan Institute, up to 70 per cent of Australians want to die at home, but only 14 per cent do so.
More than half of Australians die in hospitals and around a third die in nursing homes.
Unfortunately, the rate of hospitalisation is increasing.
Labor is committed to improving palliative care in all settings, and to helping all Australians be as comfortable as possible at the end of their life.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will invest $35 million over four years to roll out new models of palliative care.
Labor new approach to palliative care will include: $21.7 million for new Palliative Care at Home packages.
Under these packages, five Primary Health Networks (PHNs) will be funded to commission the services that Australians need to stay at home at the end of their lives.
$9 million over four years to roll out the Proactive Palliative Care model.
Labor’s Proactive Palliative Care package will fund palliative specialists to partner with residential aged care facilities to promote palliative and end-of-life care, and lead case conferencing where appropriate.
Working with the states and territories, through the Council of Australian Governments, to expand the use of consistent advanced care directives across Australia.
$2.3 million over three years to allow Palliative Care Tasmania to continue its important work.
$1 million over three years to fund Palliative Care Australia to improve paediatric palliative care support, including to: Develop new resources for families, such as on talking to terminally ill children and their siblings about death.
Create an online community for the families of terminally ill children, so that parents and carers are less isolated.
Build evidence on paediatric palliative care needs across Australia, to address current gaps and plan services and supports for the future.
Labor is committed to ensuring that all Australians is comfortable and able to live their final days in the circumstances of their choice.
POSITIVE POLICY
Life-Saving Ovarian Cancer Research
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $8 million over the next four years to make Australia a world leader in life-saving ovarian cancer research.
Ovarian cancer is the second-most common women's cancer in Australia with almost 1,500 women diagnosed every year.
Mortality is very high and is not improving at a fast enough rate.
Around 1,000 Australian women die from the disease every year.
While Australia's overall cancer survival rates are the best in the world, just 43 out of every 100 women are still alive five years after being diagnosed with ovarian cancer.
With no screening test to aid detection and prevention, most women remain unaware they have ovarian cancer until the disease is at a very advanced stage with little hope of cure.
The symptoms are hard to spot and are often mistaken for women simply feeling tired or rundown or going through menopause.
Through research done here in Australia we now know that ovarian cancer is not just one disease, but a complex range of diseases with different characteristics.
However, it is still largely being treated as one disease with limited treatment options available.
More work needs to be done to save the lives of Australian women.
Labor’s $8 million investment will deliver on the recommendations of the National Action Plan for Ovarian Cancer Research to deliver an effective and focused research funding strategy.
It will provide better outcomes for women through a collaborative approach between funders, research organisations, researchers, and clinicians together with meaningful patient involvement.
Labor’s investment supports Ovarian Cancer Australia’s 25/25 Vision to reduce the incidence of ovarian cancer by 25 per cent and to improve the five-year survival rate of women affected by ovarian cancer by 25 per cent by the year 2025.
Ovarian Cancer Australia will use this investment to leverage matched funding for all research initiatives.
In Government, Labor invested more than $3.5 billion to combat cancer.
A Shorten Labor Government will build on this record through investments like $8 million for life-saving ovarian cancer research.
Labor has also announced that it will extend and expand funding for Breast Cancer Network Australia and double the number of prostate cancer specialist nurses funded by the federal Government.
POSITIVE POLICY
National Plan for Excellence in Perinatal Mental Health
A Shorten Labor Government will establish a universal perinatal depression screening program for every expectant woman and new mother across Australia.
Labor believes every child should have the best start at life and new parents should be supported through what can be a very challenging time of transition in their lives.
Perinatal depression is a quiet, under-reported epidemic in Australia and is a significant cause of maternal death and disability.
The evidence shows that up to one in ten women experience depression in pregnancy and that this increases to one in seven in the postnatal period.
Rates of anxiety are likely to be even higher.
Men are also affected. According to Perinatal Anxiety and Depression Australia (PANDA) up to one in 20 men experience postnatal depression.
Research also indicates that 74 per cent of mothers with pre and/or postnatal depression or anxiety do not seek help until they reach the point that they cannot cope.
Labor’s National Plan will: Ensure that all pregnant women are screened to identify their risk of perinatal depression and the presence of possible symptoms, in a cost efficient and sustainable way.
Empower women and families with tailored information to guide and support them.
Facilitate best practice early intervention, treatment and support.
Integrate screening results into the My Health Record to ensure seamless referrals to health practitioners.
Collect consistent national data to support monitoring, evaluation, awareness raising, research, education and continued destigmatisation activities.
Encourage private practitioners to adopt screening as a key element of a woman’s perinatal care.
Despite all the evidence of the prevalence of perinatal depression and anxiety in Australia and the known cost of not treating the condition being estimated at $538 million per annum, the Abbott-Turnbull Government abolished the National Perinatal Depression Initiative in 2015.
Labor's National Plan for Excellence in Perinatal Mental Health will reinstate a digital screening program and follow-up support for new parents in the perinatal period across all public hospitals, maternal and child health clinics and in other health services providing care to pregnant women in regional and remote areas of Australia.
The 5-year program has been independently costed by the Parliamentary Budget Office at $20 million and will be rolled out with the support of State, Territory and local governments to ensure that every woman in Australia can be supported during pregnancy and in the critical first year of a baby's life.
Only Labor will prioritise perinatal mental health of new mums and dads so that their babies can get the best start in life.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor Will Reverse Cuts To Medicare For Pathology And Imaging
A Shorten Labor Government will reverse Malcolm Turnbull's cuts to bulk billing incentives for pathology and diagnostic imaging.
In the 2015-16 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal outlook, Mr Turnbull cut $650 million from Medicare from vital tests and scans.
Mr Turnbull's cut came in spite of the overwhelming evidence that the former Labor Government’s incentives are achieving their aim of maintaining or increasing bulk billing.
In diagnostic imaging, for example, bulk billing rates rose 10 points in just six years thanks to Labor's measure.
Labor's measure gives pathologists and radiologists a specific incentive to bulk bill.
Without it, bulk billing will fall, co-payments will rise, and patients will be forced to pay more for tests and scans - or skip them altogether.
This would mean worse health outcomes for patients and higher costs to our health system.
It is vital that patients are not turned away from care because of their ability to pay.
POSITIVE POLICY
A New National Drug Strategy
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a new National Drug Strategy – one that is proven to work.
As Ken Lay, Chair of the National Ice Taskforce, has previously said, we can’t arrest our way out of this problem.
Labor agrees.
In addition to a strong response from police and the justice system, we need to focus on treatment, prevention and harm minimisation to tackle this issue.
Our approach is based on evidence from the frontline about what actually works.
With a $31.8 million investment, we will deliver smart, cost-effective policies that help vulnerable communities in the grip of illicit drug abuse.
The first thing we want to do is to make it easier for a person to find a treatment service than a drug dealer.
We will work with the States and Territories and with the treatment sector to ensure that people who want to turn their life around don’t have to wait six months or more for a treatment service.
Labor’s evidence-based approach includes: Providing long-term funding security to treatment services so that they can get on with the job and plan for the future.
Restore expert advice bodies axed by the Liberal Government.
Boost the treatment workforce so that every person seeking help gets the support they need.
Update our harm minimisation strategies to reflect new risks for people using illicit drugs.
This builds on our announcement that a Shorten Labor Government will invest $18.2 million to implement a package of measures to tackle Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders.
When it comes to solutions for tackling substance misuse the Abbott-Turnbull Government has missed the mark again and again.
Although funds have been dedicated to tackling ice use, the treatment sector remains in an overall state of chaos.
NGO treatment services have only been offered a temporary one-year funding extension for a second year in a row, which makes it difficult for them to hire and retain the skilled staff they need to meet rising demand.
The substance misuse funds that support treatment services and prevention strategies have been cut and urgent warnings from experts in the sector ignored.
Harm reduction is the poor cousin in Australia’s current National Drug Strategy and has been given the silent treatment by this Government.
Right now we can’t say that the Government is doing everything possible to save lives affected by substance misuse.
We believe that families impacted by substance misuse across Australia deserve better.
Under Labor’s plan, taxpayer dollars will be invested in strategies that deliver real outcomes.
When someone puts their hand up and says they want to turn their life around, Labor will ensure that they can get the help they need.
POSITIVE POLICY
A National Approach to Suicide Prevention
A Shorten Labor Government will target a 50 per cent reduction in suicides over the next 10 years.
Labor’s National Suicide Prevention Strategy will provide a strong national commitment to reduce the suicide toll, and coordinate a focused effort across Australia.
Suicide affects far too many Australians.
In 2014, 2,864 Australians lost their lives to suicide.
Approximately seven Australians die from suicide every day, and for every person who dies from suicide, 30 attempt it.
We have to do better than this.
Too many families, friends and colleagues are left dealing with these traumatic losses.
There are too many kids in this country who have taken days off school to go the funeral of a classmate who has taken their own life.
There are too many parents who have had to sit at their kitchen table, shattered, exhausted and grieving, trying to write a eulogy for their own child.
Australia must do more, and under Labor, we will.
A Shorten Labor Government will commission Australia’s first national data-set of suicide deaths and work with the States and Territories to establish a national suicide register, helping experts identify vulnerable groups in our community.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $72 million over three years for 12 regional suicide pilot projects.
These projects will be in places with higher-than-average rates of suicide deaths, using a whole of community response to reduce suicide deaths in the most effective way.
Suicide is the fifth leading cause of death for Indigenous Australians.
Labor will take action to reduce suicide in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities by working with communities to implement the recommendations of the University of Western Sydney's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Suicide Prevention Evaluation Project.
Labor will also ensure that at least three of the regional suicide pilot projects are in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $9 million towards a National Suicide Prevention Fund.
The Fund will support research into reducing suicide deaths, and programs which reduce the stigma around suicide and seeking help when contemplating suicide.
In contrast to the Turnbull Government, Labor’s Strategy will provide national leadership, and builds on our commitment to:
Restore funding cut by the Liberals to six early psychosis centres, supporting young people with serious mental health problems.
Provide funding so more than 95 headspace centres around the country can stay open.
Lead the negotiation to develop the Fifth National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Plan.
Deliver regionally tailored mental health programs through existing Primary Health Networks.
Make sure people living with a mental illness continue to receive the support and care they need when they are not eligible for the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Promote the Mentally Healthy Workplace Alliance to support better mental health at work and remove the stigma and discrimination that all too often accompanies mental ill health.
Labor’s reforms will deliver $83.7 million over four years to provide national leadership on an issue that impacts on far too many in our community.
POSITIVE POLICY
A National Dementia Strategy
A Shorten Labor Government will partner with Alzheimer’s Australia to improve the lives of those living with dementia and their families, through the development of a National Dementia Strategy and the creation of dementia-friendly communities across the country.
Dementia is not simply an aged care issue - it is a chronic health condition with social and economic implications.
People living with dementia are more than the sum of their symptoms.
They deserve to live with dignity, support and security.
With more than 350,000 Australians affected by dementia, it is important to tackle this fatal disease.
Dementia is the second leading cause of death in Australia and the leading cause of disability in people over the age of 65 years.
Without a medical breakthrough, close to one million Australians will have dementia by 2050.
Each week there are more than 1,800 new cases of dementia in Australia – that is about one person every six minutes.
By 2050 that is expected to grow to 7,400 new cases.
Dementia costs the economy around $5 billion annually.
It is on track to become the third greatest source of health and residential aged care spending within two decades, representing around one percent of GDP.
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $25 million to help make Australia a dementia-friendly nation and address the increasing incidence of dementia.
This will include: Developing a National Dementia Strategy to ensure a coordinated national approach to the issue.
Supporting Alzheimer’s Australia to roll out the internationally renowned Dementia Friends program across Australia.
Establishing a dementia-friendly resource and collaboration hub.
Supporting local communities to become dementia-friendly.
Conducting two trials for respite models, to support those who provide care to people living with dementia.
A Shorten Labor Government will actively lead the way to ensure Australia is equipped and prepared to manage the increasing incidence of dementia.
Only Labor will put people living with dementia, their carers and those who provide formal care and services first.
POSITIVE POLICY
Supporting Australians With Disability
A Shorten Labor Government will continue to work to improve the lives of Australians with disability.
Labor believes that people with disability deserve the same opportunities as other Australians to participate in the community and have their rights protected.
We believe Australians with disability deserve a fair go.
In recent years Australia has made a lot of progress in extending opportunity, security and fairness to people with disability.
But we still have much more to do to ensure Australians with disability are not excluded from society.
Labor’s plan for Australians with disability includes: Delivering the National Disability Insurance Scheme on time and in full.
Under Labor, there will be no cuts, caps or delays to the NDIS.
Reinvigorating the National Disability Strategy to ensure it continues to reflect the needs of people with disability.
Boosting employment opportunities for people with disability by supporting private organisations to develop Disability Employment Action Plans, reforming Disability Employment Services and introducing public service employment targets.
Making Australian beaches more accessible and enjoyable for people with disability.
Ensuring there is a full-time Disability Discrimination Commissioner.
Protecting the pension for people with disability.
Unlike the Liberals, Labor will not try to cut pension indexation.
Boosting support for independent advocacy organisations representing people with disability.
POSITIVE POLICY
More Support For Australians With Diabetes
A Shorten Labor Government will improve access to life-saving technologies for Australians with Type 1 diabetes.
Labor will fully fund access to continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) for: All children and young adults up to the age of 21.
People aged 21 and over who have severe hypoglycaemia (low blood glucose) and who, for health or other reasons, have limited awareness of the warning signs of impending hypoglycaemia.
Pregnant women.
This $79.7 million investment over four years will fully subsidise CGM technology for these groups, making it available to those who need it most.
Based on analysis by Diabetes Australia, more than 6,000 Australians with Type 1 diabetes are expected to benefit from Labor’s investment.
At its most extreme, hypoglycaemia (low blood glucose) can be deadly.
While deaths are rare, the long term complications of Type 1 diabetes can also be devastating, with effects including kidney failure, nerve damage, heart disease, stroke and blindness.
Minimising these risks has previously required a painful and inconvenient routine of finger prick tests.
Continuous glucose monitoring devices continually monitor blood glucose levels through sensors placed under the skin, which are linked to hand-held devices such as mobile phones or insulin pumps.
CGM technology reduces the risks of Type 1 diabetes and improves quality of life.
However, the technology is expensive, and it is not currently subsided by the Australian Government.
Labor will remove this cost barrier for thousands of Australians.
Labor’s investment in CGMs also makes economic sense.
The devices help to reduce the short and long-term costs of treating diabetes.
Research shows that a single severe hypoglycaemic event can cost more than $18,000, including healthcare and productivity costs.
A Shorten Labor Government will also invest $4 million to expand access to the Insulin Pump Program, ensuring it can meet future demand.
The former Labor Government established the Insulin Pump Program in 2008 and expanded it in 2013.
The Program provides subsidised access to insulin pumps, which deliver a continuous amount of insulin throughout the day.
Insulin pump therapy can be life-changing and potentially life-saving for people with Type 1 diabetes.
It reduces the frequency of severe hypoglycaemia, enables better blood glucose management to reduce the risk of complications, and reduces the costs associated with ambulance use, emergency department presentations and hospital admissions.
Due to cost and poor access, only 12 per cent of Australians with Type 1 diabetes have accessed insulin pump therapy.
Demand for the pumps continues to outstrip the number of subsidies that are available, and hundreds of Australians are on waiting lists for the Program.
Labor’s commitment of $1 million a year over four years will expand the program from the existing 68 pumps a year to 200 pumps distributed annually.
This will meet current demand and help improve the quality of life of hundreds of people diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes.
Labor’s commitment to CGM technology and the Insulin Pump Program is further proof of our belief that all Australians should get the healthcare they need, not just the healthcare they can afford.
Keeping higher education accessible for middle and working class families: no $100,000 degrees
What should get you into uni is hard work and deep thinking — not just deep pockets.
That is why Labor is 100% against $100,000 university degrees.
POSITIVE POLICY
Higher Education – Getting More Students To Graduate
Enrolment at university isn’t an end in itself.
The previous Labor Government opened access to university – 190,000 more students are at university today as a result of our reforms.
Access will always matter to Labor – and we will continue to support the demand driven system.
But our next wave of university reform will focus on completion and quality.
We want Australian students who start university to finish university with a degree.
Department of Education figures show that 23 per cent of people who started a degree as full-time students in 2006 had not completed it after eight years.
There is evidence that attrition rates have been getting worse in recent years, meaning even more students are likely to leave university with a debt but no degree.
With the Commonwealth investing $14 billion of taxpayers’ money in universities every year, Australians are right to expect outcomes that benefit the entire community; young Australians graduating as teachers, nurses, doctors, engineers and scientists enhancing our society and our economy.
A Shorten Labor Government will set an ambitious goal to increase the number of students completing their study by 20,000 graduates per year from 2020.
Labor will work with the university sector to ensure that incentives within the demand driven system are introduced to achieve this goal.
And because students need to graduate with skills, knowledge and resilience for their working life, not just mark their name off at class, a Shorten Labor Government will invest an additional $31 million in Tertiary Education Quality Standards Australia.
The boost to TEQSA will lift the quality of teaching and resources to ensure that students graduate with a high quality education that will win them the jobs of the future.
This additional investment will provide the assurance that our investment in higher education is achieving the right outcomes, for students as well as our economy: highly skilled, highly adaptable, technology literate graduates ready to compete in the world.
Investing in education is the single most important thing we can do to maintain Australia’s prosperity and secure the jobs of the future.
Labor has always been committed to opening access to higher education to more Australians and supporting universities as critical drivers of innovation across the economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
Regional Incubators and Accelerators
Labor will create a Regional Innovation Fund, which will kickstart a range of initiatives to expand the role of Australia’s regions in contribution to the national innovation effort.
It will, for example, invest in an expansion of the network of hubs and accelerators across the country, focussing on regional and rural sites.
Labor will also support the continuation and expansion of existing university-based hubs and accelerators in metropolitan and outer-metropolitan universities.
Our approach will be flexible, underpinned by consultations with stakeholders in rural and regional Australia to ensure investment reinforces local economic strengths and priorities.
And in recognition of the success and demonstrated potential of existing university-based hubs and accelerators in metropolitan areas, additional funding will also be available on a competitive basis for these universities to ramp up their programs.
University-based accelerators will be at the centre of this initiative; however we will remain open to other avenues to boost regional innovation activity.
For example, funded entrepreneurship hubs could be based at a regional university campus or, in some cases, a local TAFE or private consortium that has attracted demonstrated regional support across business and state/local government bodies.
A Shorten Labor Government would fund the establishment of up to 20 new accelerators over three years, based on applications from consortia that must include, at a minimum: a regional university or TAFE; local government(s); and
a local business organisation (such as a Chamber of Commerce) or a group of local businesses.
Each consortium would receive seed funding of up to $500,000 per year for three years, which must be matched at least dollar-for-dollar with funding from the consortium or other sources.
POSITIVE POLICY
National Digital Workforce Plan
The internet and new technologies are massively disrupting the world of work.
In June 2015, the Committee for Economic Development of Australia published a report which predicted that as many as five million of the jobs we do today - two out of every five jobs - will be replaced by machines by 2030.
This is particularly acute for the next generation of workers with 70 per cent of young people currently entering the workforce in jobs that will be radically affected by automation.
By 2050, 13 of Australia's 19 industry sectors will be either transformed or gain significant benefit from information and communications technology, according to IBISWorld.
Major economic and employment opportunities are presented by embracing policies that support and encourage tech-fuelled innovation.
For example, in the US, experts have found that the technology sector is able to create jobs 25 times faster than the rate experienced by other US industry sectors.
Labor will develop a far reaching blueprint required to tackle the serious skills deficits holding back the sector and preventing us from extracting the great economic advantage that comes from embracing innovation.
Reflecting the huge local and international demand for skills and talent, we need a National Digital Workforce plan that can meet the needs of our startup community.
Importantly, our National Digital Workforce Plan will not only focus on deepening the pool of talent available to support our startups – this is also aimed at boosting the digital skills base across the breadth of our economy.
The key priorities of this plan will include: Strengthening the flow of entrants into the workforce who are keen to develop their ICT skills and seek opportunities within our digital economy
Improving the quality of ICT teaching in schools, vocational and tertiary education arenas;
Strengthening the quality and suitability of tertiary graduates for entry-level positions;
Addressing the low levels of representation by female and mature-aged workers within our broader ICT workforce population;
Lifting the functional knowledge of ICT within traditional industries and existing companies, to ensure we have a workforce that is capable of quickly adapting to technological change; and
Boosting the digital skills within small to medium sized enterprises.
POSITIVE POLICY
Startup Year To Create More Startups
Australian startups are crucial to building the jobs of the future.
The Australian tech startup sector has the potential to contribute 540,000 new jobs in the next two decades.
Labor will boost Australia’s young aspiring entrepreneurial talent by providing income contingent loans to students to support their participation in university accelerators or similar incubators run by successful entrepreneurs.
Startup loans will be offered to 2,000 students and new graduates each year that want to establish a startup within a university-based (or similar) accelerator.
The loan will cover the cost of the support provided to them by an accredited accelerator program and accredited non-award programs and initiatives, up to the maximum annual student contribution level under the HECS system.
Delivering new startup loans through the existing HECS system will offer final year students and new graduates the option of taking an additional business-focused year so they can develop their innovative startup ideas.
It aims to encourage systemic change at universities through supporting the development of university accelerators and incubators.
Over time this may assist in supporting more partnerships with well established and leading facilities such as Tank Stream Labs, Blue Chilli, Fishburners, ATPi and equivalents around the country.
Over time, this program will drive a competitive market as education institutions seek and develop the best talent and draw in private sector mentors and investors.
This will improve collaboration between universities and the investment and technology sectors and strengthen Australia’s entrepreneurial ecosystems.
POSITIVE POLICY
Debt-free STEM Degrees
International research suggests 75 per cent of the fastest-growing occupations now require STEM skills and knowledge.
Employment in STEM occupations is projected to grow at almost twice the pace of other occupations.
In his 2014 report Science, Technology, Engineering, and Maths: Australia’s Future, Chief Scientist Ian Chubb called on the Federal Government to “Support the national interest by maintaining the pipeline of STEM graduates, and increase the recognition of STEM education and careers as a public good."
The Chief Scientist recognised that economic growth cannot be sustained without inquiring and capable people, a steady pipeline of specialist STEM skills in the workforce, and general science and mathematical literacy in the community.
Labor agrees.
That is why we will make a university STEM degree more attractive than ever before, representing a major step towards delivering the high-skilled graduate workforce our country needs.
We will provide a financial incentive for students to enrol in, and complete, a STEM undergraduate degree, in recognition of the significant public benefit of growing Australia’s STEM capacity.
Labor will offer 20,000 STEM Award Degrees a year for five years.
Upon graduation, the entire HECS-HELP debt will be written off, meaning these students can graduate debt free.
At present, an average science graduate will take eight years to pay off the $44,000 HECS debt they leave university with.
A Labor Government will give the next generation of Australians an incentive to undertake STEM degrees and offer them a head start in their working life, free of student debt.
This policy will take effect in the 2017 school year.
Previous incentives to study STEM subjects have been small, piecemeal and largely unsuccessful.
The STEM degree scholarships will provide incentives with a different scale and scope.
This policy reflects Labor’s focus for higher education: structuring assistance to encourage and incentivise completions at university.
Students will continue to accrue their HECS-HELP debt as normal, so a failure to graduate will see them retain that liability.
The policy will also reflect Labor’s equity objectives, with the selection criteria to target increasing enrolments in underrepresented groups like women.
With women representing only 20 per cent of engineering and related technologies enrolments, and 14 per cent of information technology enrolments, boosting the representation of women in STEM degrees is a serious priority.
Labor will consult with the Chief Scientist, and work with universities and State Governments to develop selection criteria  around access to the scheme, the eligible courses and use of the grants.
This policy will seek to encourage universities to work with schools and TAFEs to target students in their last two years of their schooling or TAFE, with an emphasis in boosting the number of STEM students from underrepresented groups such as women, Indigenous, regional and lower SES backgrounds.
The independent Parliamentary Budget Office has costed our plan to boost the number of students doing STEM degrees at $45 million over the next four years.
POSITIVE POLICY
Higher education – Student Funding Guarantee
Investing in education is the single most important thing we can do to maintain Australia’s prosperity and secure the jobs of the future.
Labor has always been committed to opening access to higher education to more Australians and supporting universities as critical drivers of innovation across the economy.
A Shorten Labor Government will build on this record – not just because it is the fair thing to do, but because our future prosperity depends on it.
Two in every three jobs created in the future will require a university degree, and so we need to be building the workforce of the future today.
The role of Government should be improving access to higher education not putting walls around our universities through a massive debt burden.
Labor is the party of education and expanding opportunity to higher education.
Because of our past reforms an additional 190,000 students are enrolled at university today.
Labor will continue the demand driven system and ensure that access to university remains a matter of hard work and good marks, not your bank balance.
A Shorten Labor Government will introduce a new Student Funding Guarantee to provide certainty to universities and remove the need for higher fees.
Under a Shorten Labor Government, average funding per undergraduate student in 2018 will be more than $11,800.
This additional investment will ensure that students are encouraged rather than deterred from studying at university, improving the productive capacity of our economy.
To provide certainty and confidence to a sector that is vital to maintaining Australia’s prosperity, Labor will legislate the Student Funding Guarantee, and index the funding to ensure the value of the contribution isn’t eroded over time.
Only Labor is committed to investing in higher education to create and sustain the jobs of the future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Higher education – Independent Commission
Studying at university should open the door to a well-paying career.
For that to occur, universities must be responsive to labour market pressures and educate students for growth areas in the economy.
Labor will continue to support the demand driven system which has seen an additional 190,000 students enrolled at university today.
But universities must also be attuned to the future labour market and the needs of employers.
Improvements in access to big data and advanced analytics capabilities will assist in developing better labour market profiles and forecasting skills needs.
A Shorten Labor Government will work with our universities, industry and science agencies to get the incentives right to meet the needs of the future economy.
From skill shortages in key occupations to productivity-driving opportunities in new industries, universities will be encouraged within the existing funding system to be more responsive to drivers of growth.
In consultation with universities, Labor will establish an independent Higher Education Productivity and Performance Commission to drive these labour market outcomes.
Similar Commissions are common in other developed economies; in the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Hong Kong, and provide good examples of best practice for Australia to consider.
The current arrangements between the Commonwealth and universities have not always worked as well as they could or in the way they were intended.
Representing a $14 billion a year investment, Australian taxpayers are entitled to demand that their hard-earned money is delivering the highest standards of teaching and learning, for the benefit of individual students as well as our society and our economy.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will work with the sector to uphold a focus on accountability and performance and to lift productivity in our universities.
POSITIVE POLICY
Higher education – Clearer Information For Parents and Students
The success of our students starts with choosing the right course, at the right university.
There is an obligation on government to assist students in making informed choices upon entering university.
From the final years of high school, to applying for courses at university, we must do more to ensure that students and parents have the information they need to make good decisions.
With the demand driven system similar to a marketplace for students and course offerings, government should ensure that students are well-informed consumers.
Before enrolling for a degree, students should have access to information like what the average salary is upon graduation, and career opportunities upon graduation.
There are many opportunities to leverage digital technology and a Shorten Labor Government will engage Australia’s burgeoning start-up industry in this process.
More informed students and parents will mean better decisions and ultimately improved outcomes.
A similar approach has recently been announced in the United States by President Obama in the form of a College Scorecard.
Labor is committed to ensuring that students have the best information available when deciding to enrol into a specific course and will work with students, parents, universities, professional career counselling bodies and business to embrace new technology and forms of transparency.
Investing in education is the single most important thing we can do to maintain Australia’s prosperity and secure the jobs of the future.
Labor has always been committed to opening access to higher education to more Australians and supporting universities as critical drivers of innovation across the economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
Higher education – Clearer Information For Parents and Students
The success of our students starts with choosing the right course, at the right university.
There is an obligation on government to assist students in making informed choices upon entering university.
From the final years of high school, to applying for courses at university, we must do more to ensure that students and parents have the information they need to make good decisions.
With the demand driven system similar to a marketplace for students and course offerings, government should ensure that students are well-informed consumers.
Before enrolling for a degree, students should have access to information like what the average salary is upon graduation, and career opportunities upon graduation.
There are many opportunities to leverage digital technology and a Shorten Labor Government will engage Australia’s burgeoning start-up industry in this process.
More informed students and parents will mean better decisions and ultimately improved outcomes.
A similar approach has recently been announced in the United States by President Obama in the form of a College Scorecard.
Labor is committed to ensuring that students have the best information available when deciding to enrol into a specific course and will work with students, parents, universities, professional career counselling bodies and business to embrace new technology and forms of transparency.
Investing in education is the single most important thing we can do to maintain Australia’s prosperity and secure the jobs of the future.
Labor has always been committed to opening access to higher education to more Australians and supporting universities as critical drivers of innovation across the economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
University of Tasmania Jobs and Growth Package
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $150 million in the education-driven economic revival of North and North-Western Tasmania to improve education outcomes and deliver jobs.
Under the $300 million co-investment plan with the University of Tasmania, two new campuses will be constructed at Inveresk in Launceston and West Park in Burnie.
It will create 3,110 jobs, including 265 additional academic and professional staff jobs and support 12 000 new students into higher education in North and North-West Tasmania
The plan is estimated to deliver $1.1 billion economic output during the construction phase alone and an additional $428 million a year in economic activity.
Project partners UTAS will provide $75 million towards the plan which will provide high quality, work ready, affordable associate degrees programs which are aligned to what industry needs, meaning more students into jobs.
Federal Labor today calls on the State Government to match the university and commit the final $75 million to make this project happen.
Over the last 12 months Labor’s Tasmania Taskforce has engaged with local communities in a frank conversation about how best to get Tasmania moving again.
Tasmanians - in each and every conversation and submission – have raised education as the key factor to power additional jobs and prosperity.
The University of Tasmania presented their proposal to the Tasmania Taskforce and have made a compelling case for a project that will transform Tasmania’s future.
This co-investment will both increase higher education participation and attainment in Tasmania, as well as underpin growth and prosperity in North and North-West Tasmania.
Tasmania continues to fall behind the rest of Australia in educational outcomes and rates of youth unemployment remain too high.
Tasmania has the country’s lowest proportion of higher education attainment, with just 14.2 percent of people having successfully completed university compared with 19.9 percent in NSW and 20.8 percent in Victoria.
This low level of educational attainments continue to put a hold on economy growth and productivity in Tasmania.
Analysis shows that Tasmania is an ideal pilot location for this type of facility, and the potential expansion of Associate Degrees as a way of addressing educational disadvantage more broadly across the country.
We are letting young Tasmanians down by not equipping them with the skills they need and disadvantaging businesses who want to employ Tasmanians and grow.
Labor’s investment will help young Tasmanians to get the education they need to get a job and support a stronger economic future for the state.
This approach will help build a more skilled and better qualified workforce, in an economy which is in transition from its traditional commodity and manufacturing base to the knowledge and service industries of the future.
The University of Tasmania believes that up to 35,000 eligible Tasmanians are not going to university when they could – this investment will change that.
While the Liberals' agenda to deregulate our higher education sector would see our regional campuses in Burnie and Launceston close their doors, Labor’s investment will ensure they not also stay open, but grow.
Only Labor has a positive plan for higher education.
The Liberals plans for universities revolve around $100,000 and huge cuts, which will hurt universities in places like Tasmania the hardest.
It would see regional campuses in Burnie and Launceston close their doors.
POSITIVE POLICY
Restoring Integrity in VET and Protecting Students and Taxpayers from Rip-offs
A Shorten Labor Government will introduce a loan cap of $8,000 a year in the VET FEE-HELP program as part of an integrity package to stop the massive waste of taxpayers’ money, to prevent price gouging of students and improve training outcomes.
Under the Liberals, the VET FEE-HELP loans scheme has escalated from $699 million in 2013 to $1.7 billion in 2014 and is expected to have blown out to over $3 billion for 2015.
At the same time, students are being ripped off by unscrupulous colleges and dodgy providers - and taxpayers are being forced to pick up the tab.
In some colleges it is costing taxpayers over a million dollars in VET FEE-HELP loans to produce a single graduate.
In 2014, the ten largest private training college recipients of VET FEE-HELP subsidies in Australia were paid $900 million in government subsidies - yet less than five per cent of their students graduated.
Labor will stop this waste of taxpayers’ money and exploitation of students.
Our plan will restore integrity to the system, by cleaning out the dodgy private providers who have been ripping Australians off for too long.
Labor’s plan to rein in these taxpayer subsidies and restore integrity to the vocational education sector will save Australian taxpayers $6 billion over ten years.
There will be an exemption on legitimate high-cost courses such as nursing and engineering following ministerial approval.
Other measures in Labor’s integrity package include: Ensuring that funding for providers is linked to student progress
Set national priorities to help meet the skills needs of industry
Crackdown on the use of brokers to recruit students
Ensure that only the highest quality colleges get access to funding
Tougher powers to audit, investigate and suspend unscrupulous providers
Nation-building infrastructure: jobs, road and rail
We are committed to nation-building.
That’s why Labor will invest in roads and rail to ensure our cities and regions have properly integrated transport systems that boost productivity.
POSITIVE POLICY
Empowering Infrastructure Australia
Australia has an infrastructure deficit.
Infrastructure Australia estimates the economic cost of underinvestment will reach $53 billion a year by 2031 and become an increasing drag on growth.
Well-targeted investment in infrastructure - whether by the private or public sector - creates jobs now and increases our jobs capacity in the future.
Investment in transport, energy, communications and water infrastructure also expands the productive capacity of the economy, growing the base for future Budget revenue.
The current Liberal Government has presided over a collapse in infrastructure investment. ABS figures show public sector engineering work has fallen by 20 per cent compared with the last quarter of the Labor Government in 2013.
Labor will take the politics out of infrastructure and put the nation’s interest at the heart of nation building again.
We will empower Infrastructure Australia to become an active participant in the infrastructure market, working with State Governments and brokering deals to bring nation building projects to fruition.
Infrastructure Australia will develop a long term pipeline for projects for the Commonwealth Government and ensure that projects move through the assessment, development and financing phases.
Just as the Reserve Bank of Australia is the independent authority at the centre of monetary policy, Infrastructure Australia will be at the centre of capital investment, driving results that are in the national interest.
It will operate in a similar way to the Reserve Bank of Australia and a Shorten Labor Government will properly consult the Opposition on all board appointments.
Under Labor, Infrastructure Australia will deliver:  Independent assessments and scrutiny
We will ensure that Infrastructure Australia independently assesses all major infrastructure projects on the basis of the benefits they provide to the economy and society as whole, their commercial viability, and their capacity to enhance national productivity.
Transparency
We will strengthen the transparency in infrastructure decision making through publishing the business case for projects and proper engagement with the community.
It is critical the public has confidence in infrastructure development.
Brokering
Under Labor, Infrastructure Australia will be given new authority to structure deals, engage private sector partners, and work closely with the state governments to take projects from the drawing board to construction.
Infrastructure Australia will work with the States, long term investors, the private sector, financiers and constructors, to address the market failure in bringing new infrastructure projects to the market.
Our plan to empower Infrastructure Australia to make decisions in the national interest and pursue projects with major economic gains will kick-start a new phase of infrastructure investment and help unblock the bottlenecks that are holding productivity back across our cities and regions.
POSITIVE POLICY
Plan For Our Cities
Cities matter.
They produce 80 per cent of our GDP
and are home to four out of five Australians.
Indeed, in the Asian Century they matter even more than they did in 1972.
The opportunity is clear: by 2030, the Asia Pacific region will have a middle class of 3.2 billion people, almost twice as many as Europe, the Americas, Africa and the Middle East combined.
By 2025, this region will produce over half of global output.
Australia is fortunate to be at the world’s economic epicentre.
We must compete with our innovation, our skills and ability to deliver high value outcomes.
In the 21st century, productivity is the main weapon we have to grow national wealth, lift living standards and stay in front in the battle for international competitiveness.
Creative cities policy which boosts productivity will be critical to our success.
Labor has a 10 point plan for cities.
The plan represents a comprehensive vision that goes to the heart of what makes our cities productive, sustainable and liveable.
The plan comprises: Investing in properly integrated transport systems involving public transport and roads
Investing in active transport solutions which connect up with public transport, education and employment hubs;
Addressing housing affordability through the use of urban planning, land supply and use of incentives;
Aligning greater housing density with public transport corridors;
Promoting jobs growth in outer suburbs.
This could be through direct investment such as Badgerys Creek Airport and Moorebank Intermodal project
, or by giving consideration to incentives for location of business;
Promoting jobs growth in middle rings around cities by investing in research precincts around universities and hospitals;
Supporting connectivity and productivity through fibre-to-the-premise National Broadband Network;
Supporting renewable energy including buildings and precincts that produce their own power in new developments;
Enhancing sustainability and resilience of household and industrial water supply and rehabilitating our urban waterways which for too long were used for industrial waste;
Cooperation between Governments to promote the development of second or third CBD’s to decentralise jobs growth.
It recognises the need to create alternate employment centres,
protect our urban environment,
address the issue of housing affordability
and ensure our cities have integrated public and active transport systems.
POSITIVE POLICY
Financing The Infrastructure Of The Future
The current Liberal Government has presided over a collapse in infrastructure investment in Australia. ABS figures show public sector engineering work has fallen by 20 per cent compared with the last quarter of the Labor Government in 2013.
Infrastructure Australia estimates the economic cost of underinvestment in Australia’s roads, rail links and ports will reach $53 billion a year by 2031 and become an increasing drag on growth.
Labor will take the politics out of infrastructure and put the nation’s interest at the heart of nation building again.
We will empower Infrastructure Australia to become an active participant in the infrastructure market, working with State Governments and brokering deals to bring nation building projects to fruition.
To deliver a stable and ongoing pipeline of infrastructure into the future, Labor will also give Infrastructure Australia an independent financing capacity and balance sheet to jumpstart the development of new projects.
Establishing an independent, funded project broker that is able to structure projects and work programs to reflect risk will provide greater certainty for investors and incentivise States to propose projects and clear approvals.
Under a Shorten Labor Government, Infrastructure Australia will be given a new Financing Mandate that will mobilise private sector finance through a range of instruments including loans, loan guarantees and equity investments.
A more active role for the Federal Government has been called for by a broad range of public finance experts as well as private sector investors and the business community.
Operating in a similar way to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, Labor’s new Infrastructure Australia will have a $10 billion financing facility, if needed, to deploy a combination of guarantees, loans or equity to get new projects started provided they meet stringent criteria.
Using a conservative analysis prepared by Infrastructure Partners Australia, a $10 billion infrastructure investment will directly create approximately 26,000 jobs
and add around an extra $7.5 billion every year to Australia’s GDP.
This is not a grants program.
Empowering Infrastructure Australia in this way will attract more private investment – not crowd it out.
It will only offer loans, loan guarantees and equity where there is market failure and where projects are expected to deliver a return on its investment.
This ensures that there is flexibility in financing arrangements to deliver the most efficient and effective arrangements on a project by project basis.
Labor won’t just talk about infrastructure; we will ensure it actually gets built by boosting Infrastructure Australia with an independent financing facility to make smarter investments that can get our cities and regions moving again.
POSITIVE POLICY
Smart, Sustainable Infrastructure
A Labor Government will toughen assessment of proposed major infrastructure projects by requiring the incorporation of smart infrastructure technology and sustainability measures before projects qualify for Commonwealth funding.
Under current arrangements, Infrastructure Australia independently advises the Commonwealth on major projects in terms of their cost-benefits analysis and how they fit with the existing infrastructure mix.
But a Labor Government will broaden Infrastructure Australia’s role.
We will add new assessment criteria on smart infrastructure and sustainability to increase value for public money and take genuine action to improve liveability in our major cities.
Smart Infrastructure:
Smart infrastructure is technology that increases the efficiency of infrastructure.
On roads, for example, modern signalling and traffic monitoring allows for traffic flows to be adjusted according to the time of day, making more lanes accessible during peak time.
This technology increases the efficiency of new roads, but in some cases, smart technology can also make existing roads so efficient there is no need to build new ones.
Under a Labor Government, road project proponents will need to demonstrate they have incorporated smart infrastructure and at least considered the alternative option of using technology to improve existing roads.
This will ensure we squeeze every drop of efficiency out of existing infrastructure and that new projects meet world’s best practice.
Sustainable Infrastructure:
Labor’s new sustainability criteria will ensure that government incorporates measures that add to sustainability when they design new roads and railway lines.
For example, when building a new road in a city, we should consider opportunities to build an adjacent bike track or walking track at the same time.
This will take more cars off the roads by increasing travel options.
In the same way, it makes sense that when we build new railway lines, stations should include safe storage areas for bicycles to make it easier for people to leave their cars at home.
The sustainability mandate represents genuine action on tackling traffic congestion in urban Australia, which will cost the nation $53 billion by 2031 if we don’t act to tackle it.
These new criteria for projects will be implemented through Infrastructure Australia.
POSITIVE POLICY
Plan for Australian Metals Manufacturing and Jobs
Being an advanced economy that can make things here at home means ensuring Australia’s strategic industries have a sustainable future.
To secure the long-term future of our local metal industries, we need to make smart use of the opportunities in front of us and build on Australia’s natural strengths.
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver a new plan to secure our strategically significant metals manufacturing industries, starting with Australia's steel industry.
Labor’s six-point Plan for Australian Metals Manufacturing and Jobs demonstrates Labor’s commitment to a strong future for Australia’s metal industries.
Under our six-point plan, Labor will:
1. Ensure Australian standards are upheld in Federal Government funded projects
We will introduce new steel procurement regulations that require projects receiving government funding to use steel that meets Australian standards and certification requirements.
These regulations will be developed in a way that is consistent with our international obligations, and adherence to them will be verified and monitored with rigorous third party audits.
Where there is currently no relevant Australian standard, these will be developed in consultation with industry and Standards Australia.
2. Seek to maximise the use of locally-produced steel in Federal Government funded projects
We will ensure local steel producers have the best opportunity to participate in federal projects through the enhanced use of Australian Industry Participation Plans and the rigorous application of Australian standards.
3. Halve the thresholds for projects required to have an Australian Industry Participation Plan to drive more opportunities for local businesses
Under Labor’s Australian Jobs Act, major public and private projects with capital expenditure above certain thresholds must prepare and implement an Australian Industry Participation (AIP) plan.
These plans ensure information about opportunities to bid for work on major projects is made available at all levels of the supply chain.
Labor will halve the threshold for private projects to prepare an AIP Plan from $500 million to $250 million.
We will also halve the public sector threshold from $20 million to $10 million.
4. Double funding for the Australian Industry Participation Authority and appoint an Australian Industry Participation Board
Labor set up the AIP Authority to advise and assist those developing major projects in meeting their obligations under the Australian Jobs Act.
The Authority’s role includes evaluating, approving and publishing summaries of Australian Industry Participation plans, as well as monitoring and reporting on the implementation of these plans.
5. Ensure Australia’s anti-dumping system has the right powers and penalties in place
Labor will make sure Australia’s anti-dumping system is operating effectively and will work with the Anti-Dumping Commission to accelerate enhancements to the system.
6. Create a National Steel Supplier Advocate
The National Steel Supplier Advocate will work with Australian steel manufacturers to win major contracts.
The Steel Supplier Advocate will particularly work with small and medium sized steel fabricators to generate the kind of consortia and co-production deals that will allow them to deliver products at scale and in more competitive ways.
Labor will start delivering our Plan for Australian Metals Manufacturing and Jobs within 100 days of forming office, with the establishment of the Metals Manufacturing Innovation Council.
Labor has developed our plan by listening to industry and being willing to act on the practical challenges holding our metal industries back.
We’re not just talking about keeping these industries strong for the future; we’re acting to make sure they can be.
POSITIVE POLICY
Backing Apprenticeships
A Shorten Labor Government will boost apprenticeships across the country, giving more Australians the opportunity to gain real skills and a good job.
Labor will do this by ensuring a proportion of the jobs on major federally funded-projects are delivered as apprenticeships.
We will start with a target of seeing one in 10 jobs on Labor’s priority infrastructure projects filled by Australian apprentices.
This will create 2,600 new apprenticeship places for young workers seeking a job and real skills.
In government, we will also work with the States and Territories and industry to develop procurement rules for apprentices that will apply to all infrastructure, construction and defence projects with capital expenditure over $10 million.
This will create tens of thousands more apprenticeship places in the years to come.
Only Labor backs apprentices and vocational training, because we believe every Australian should have the chance to gain real skills and a good job.
POSITIVE POLICY
Fast-tracking Priority National Infrastructure Projects
Infrastructure projects have become much too politicised under the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Labor will take the politics out of infrastructure and put the nation’s interest at the heart of nation building again.
We will achieve this by empowering Infrastructure Australia to become an active participant in the infrastructure market, working with State Governments and brokering deals to bring nation building projects to fruition.
We will also give Infrastructure Australia an independent financing capacity and balance sheet to jumpstart the development of new projects.
We have announced an initial short-list of projects that Labor supports and would pursue as a priority in Government.
The initial list of projects that Labor will support includes: The Airport Rail to Badgerys Creek, connecting the Western and South lines
The Melbourne Metro
The Cross River Rail project in Brisbane
The ‘G’ Light Rail on the Gold Coast
Tasmania’s Midland Highway
Perth Metronet
Gawler Line electrification and AdeLINK in Adelaide
The Pacific and Bruce Highway packages, projects that have been underway for several years, but need to be fast tracked to completion
These are projects that Infrastructure Australia has either assessed, or where Labor will work with state governments to fast-track assessments – they are Australia’s national to-do-list of priority infrastructure projects.
Beyond these immediate priorities, Labor will develop a long term pipeline for projects and ensuring the steady movement of projects through the assessment, development and financing phases.
By building Infrastructure Australia up as an independent, funded project-broker, we will provide new and greater certainty to investors as well as creating a powerful incentive for State governments to propose and approve projects.
Just as the Reserve Bank of Australia is the independent authority at the centre of monetary policy, Infrastructure Australia will be at the centre of capital investment, driving results that are in the national interest.
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver better infrastructure to ease congestion, create jobs and improve productivity.
POSITIVE POLICY
Build Jobs and Industry While Tackling Climate Change
Labor’s guiding philosophy for more than a century has been that a stable job, with decent pay and conditions, is the bedrock of a decent life.
Saving for a home, raising a family, having financial security in retirement are only possible when you have a decent job.
Climate change will drive the most significant economic transformation in modern history.
That’s why we need a plan to address the challenges posed by a changing climate and create new opportunities for our businesses and industry –
and secure the jobs of the future.
To achieve this, a Shorten Labor Government will establish a Strategic Industries Taskforce to undertake in-depth engagement with emissions intensive, trade exposed (EITE) industries and identify options to support their future competitiveness.
This will be supported by a Strategic Industries Reserve Fund of $300 million to support the transition of key industries to 2020.
The heightened awareness of climate risk is driving rapid and accelerating innovation in our energy sector, resulting in falling costs for clean technology and renewable energy.
On top of this, the increasing market for low-carbon products, new patterns of international production and trade and technological advances have dramatically altered the shape of the global economy over the last two decades.
But there is an important choice for governments the world over – do they support this transition, ensuring their countries and citizens benefit from the change, or do they ignore the shifts, consigning their countries to laggard status in the global race for growth and jobs?
Labor recognises this rapid change means that “Business as usual” is no longer an option - structural change is inevitable, but we need to act now so that we can capitalise on these shifts to build a stronger, fairer and more resilient economy.
The transition of Australia’s economy to a clean energy future is not negotiable.
POSITIVE POLICY
High Speed Rail
A Labor Government will establish a High Speed Rail Authority to work through a process for gathering international expressions of interest over the construction of a High Speed Rail link between Brisbane and Melbourne via Sydney and Canberra.
Labor’s push to advance this visionary project will end three years of Coalition inaction on High Speed Rail, which would revolutionise interstate travel and turbo charge regional development.
A feasibility study completed in 2013 found the project would be viable, with the Sydney to Melbourne leg expected to return more than $2 in economic benefit for every dollar invested.
And an expert panel led by former Nationals Leader Tim Fischer and the Business Council of Australia’s Jennifer Westacott recommended creation of a planning authority to work with the Queensland, NSW, Victoria and ACT governments to advance planning and begin to acquire the corridor before it is built out by urban sprawl.
Despite the former Labor Government allocating $54 million to establish the Authority, the incoming Liberal Government scrapped the idea.
The Coalition has since refused to facilitate debate of the Private Member’s Bill that Labor introduced into Parliament in December 2013.
A Labor Government will create the Authority and, once it is established, work through a process for gathering any expressions of interest.
High Speed Rail is a proven technology.
Around the world millions of people travel using it every day.
Almost every example of well deployed High Speed Rail involves a partnership between government and the private sector.
Companies based in Japan, China, Korea and Europe have experience in constructing and operating successful High Speed Rail projects and we should use that expertise.
High Speed Rail would allow for travel between capital cities in as little as three hours.
It would also drive economic development of regional communities on its route including the Gold Coast, Casino, Grafton, Coffs Harbour, Port Macquarie, Taree, Newcastle, the Central Coast, Southern Highlands, Wagga Wagga, Albury-Wodonga and Shepparton.
High Speed Rail stacks up.
We just need a government with the vision to get the ball rolling.
POSITIVE POLICY
National Cycling Strategy
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $1.25 million in the Australian Bicycle Council to ensure the ongoing development of a national cycling strategy.
The former Labor Government funded the Council in 2011 so it could develop the 2011-2016 National Cycling Strategy, in consultation with Australia’s Transport Ministers and other interest groups.
The 2011-2016 strategy saw a number of improvements nationwide, which included the introduction of pedal-assist bicycles, consistency in design guidance for bicycle infrastructure, the publication of national metrics and reporting on cycling participation, safety, integrated planning and government investment in cycling.
With funding set to end in December 2016, the Turnbull Government is jeopardising the development of this active transport policy by refusing to commit to any additional funding.
In contrast, Labor understands that our cities face challenges of increased congestion, which is why we will prioritise the cycling strategy.
A Shorten Labor Government will require that all projects submitted to Infrastructure Australia add another criterion to its assessments – the inclusion of active transport modes including cycling and walking.
We will also continue to work with States and Territories to consider establishing a new Walking, Riding and Access to Public Transport Council, as outlined in the 2013 Walking, Riding and Access to Public Transportreport.
Linking active transport through walking and cycling to our public transport systems is a key part of sustainable urban design.
This announcement builds on Labor’s plans to improve our cities and ensure they are productive, sustainable and liveable.
POSITIVE POLICY
Manufacturing Transition Boost
A Shorten Labor Government will unite with the Victorian and South Australian Governments to deliver new jobs in the regions worst affected by motor vehicle production closures.
Labor will commit $59 million to the Manufacturing Transition Boost jobs package to ensure regions across the nation - including Geelong and Northern Adelaide - continue to have strong workforces and local jobs.
These regions face the prospect of high unemployment and social dislocation after the Liberals goaded the car industry into closing down and leaving Australia.
This jobs package will provide pathways to new jobs for skilled workers by attracting new business investment in advanced manufacturing.
Firms will be given new incentives to diversify into new products and markets and employ automotive workers who have lost their jobs.
This package is critical not just for the automotive industry and jobs – it's critical for Australia’s economy.
Automotive vehicle production is supported by a supply chain of around 160 businesses, involved in component manufacturing, engineering, design and tooling.
It's estimated that for every one automotive job, 6.5 jobs are generated in associated supply.
Modelling suggests that 200,000 people will lose their jobs as a result of closures in motor vehicle production between now and 2017.
The shutdowns will rip $29 billion from the economy – about two per cent of GDP.
Under the Manufacturing Transition Boost jobs package, funding of $10.5 million will help existing automotive businesses develop and implement plans to plug into new supply chains, bring new products to market and improve productivity.
This will benefit firms across the nation including in Victoria and South Australia where the automotive industry is concentrated
as well as the 16,000 automotive manufacturing jobs in NSW and Queensland.
In addition, $48.1 million will be provided to stimulate investment in new opportunities in advanced manufacturing.
Rather than duplicate programs at the State and Federal level, Labor will leverage the work already done by State Governments and supplement existing state programs, both by increasing the resources these programs can draw on and by expanding their scope.
In Victoria, Labor’s Manufacturing Transition Boost will expand the Victorian Government’s successful Local Industry Fund for Transition (LIFT) program.
With location targeted assistance in North Melbourne, South East Melbourne, West Melbourne and Geelong, this boost will back Victorian workers as they transition to new jobs.
In South Australia, Labor will expand the existing South Australian Government Automotive Supplier Diversification Program (ASDP) through a $15 million investment to expand the program to non-automotive manufacturing businesses in South Australia.
Australians, and Labor, understand the importance of this industry, even if the Turnbull Liberal Government does not.
The Liberals have done nothing but drive advanced manufacturing jobs offshore and have abandoned Australia’s automotive industry.
For the last three years, the only jobs they've been worried about have been their own.
While Mr Turnbull waffles about the importance of manufacturing and a diverse economy, over 50,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost under the Liberals since 2013
Malcolm Turnbull and Christopher Pyne have sat in the Cabinet room and signed up to billions of dollars of short-sighted cuts that undermined Australia’s ability to be an innovation nation.
In contrast, Labor will fight to keep high-skilled, high-wage jobs in Australia, and is committed to supporting manufacturing workers and their families in the transition to the future economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
Perth Growth Corridor Infrastructure Program
Labor believes in making our cities work better and ensuring Australians in growth areas have access to the same quality infrastructure as those living in more established ones.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will invest in new infrastructure in Perth’s key growth corridors.
Labor will fund a METRONET with a $1 billion contribution to planning and then construction.
Labor will duplicate Armadale Road, build the North Lake Road Bridge and fix one of Western Australia’s most notorious intersections at Denny Avenue in Kelmscott to get ahead of congestion in southern Perth.
This is the first step in Labor’s plan for productivity enhancing infrastructure in Perth that will deliver hundreds of jobs and make life easier for tens of thousands of families and businesses.
The Community Connect South project will open up the south eastern corridor of Perth, removing congestion, improving travel times and improving access to the new suburbs of Piara Waters, Harrisdale, Hilbert, Haynes, Banjup and Forrestdale.
This important project will support the growth of business parks and shopping centres in the area which in turn will support and grow local jobs.
Labor will also deliver $25 million to upgrade Denny Avenue and its intersections with Streich Avenue, Albany Highway and the rail crossing.
Recent growth in the Kelmscott area has seen this 200 metre stretch of road become increasingly hazardous.
Since 2010, 18,000 new residents have settled in the City of Armadale which puts increased pressure on this rail crossing and intersection.
A preliminary estimate of the cost of this project is around $50 million and further detailed design and planning work will be required.
These investments are a much-needed down payment to create more local jobs, more liveable suburbs and more productive communities in the West.
Labor will also address congestion issues in Perth’s north-west corridor.
Wanneroo Road is specifically mentioned in Infrastructure Australia’s description of congestion points in the Perth north-west corridor.
Delays at these intersections are contributing to an estimated delay cost of $2 billion by 2031 across this corridor.
Labor’s $45 million commitment will provide up to $22.5 million for the grade separation of Wanneroo Road and Ocean Reef Road, and a further up to $22.5 million for the grade separation of Wanneroo Road and Joondalup Drive.
These overpasses will provide for grade separation between Wanneroo Road and the crossroads at these intersections, avoiding the need for lights and significantly improving the flow of traffic.
These works will improve traffic flow at these growing intersections, significantly improving journey times and safety.
Labor calls on the WA Liberal Government to match Labor’s commitments and to provide the additional funding required to complete these projects.
How our cities function is a key productivity, growth and jobs issue. It strongly links to economic policy.
Labor has a proper cities policy, that means taking an integrated approach to how cities are built, developing public transport and roads together, using smart infrastructure solutions to manage our existing infrastructure assets better and planning ahead.
Labor has always been interested in cities, not just putting in a half-hearted effort in the last six months.
We need to anticipate and get ahead of expected growth.
These overpasses are an example of that.
The Abbott-Turnbull Liberals have done nothing to help create jobs in WA either, with deep cuts hitting business and consumer confidence.
Western Australians deserve better, and when it comes to local infrastructure, Labor will ensure they get it.
And there’s more to come.
POSITIVE POLICY
Build Perth METRONET
A Shorten Labor Government will create more jobs and get Perth moving again by investing in the city’s most important public transport project: METRONET.
We will end the shambles that the Liberals have made of transport planning by providing an initial $1 billion to build new lines and extend the passenger rail network across the city.
Perth is a fast growing city and it needs a clear transport plan.
Between 2001 and 2007 under the previous Labor State Government, 82 kilometres of rail was built.
But since 2008 just 8 kilometres of track has been laid.
Infrastructure Australia says that without additional funding for transport projects in Perth, the cost of delays in urban transport will blow out from $2 billion in 2011 to $16 billion by 2031.
While the best Malcolm Turnbull will do it take selfies on public transport, Labor will actually build it.
We will work with the West Australian Government to get the planning underway for METRONET, and submit a full business case to Infrastructure Australia.
Labor will contribute $760 million to the project out to 2020, with a further $240 million available in the following two years.
Priorities for planning and assessment will include: Building a Morley-Ellenbrook Line.
Extending the Northern Suburbs line to Yanchep.
Extending the Armadale Line to Byford.
Commencing a Circle Line, linking the Mandurah Line to the Thornlie Line.
Remove unsafe level crossings that slow traffic on the Midland, Armadale and Fremantle Lines and help provide an incentive for urban renewal
Building a new station at Karnup on the Mandurah Line.
Labor’s funding commitment to METRONET will depend on a positive assessment from Infrastructure Australia.
This is consistent with our position that all major infrastructure projects must be subject to a thorough and detailed assessment prior to securing funds.
The current Coalition Government cut over $4 billion in funding to public transport projects when it was elected, including $500 million for Perth public transport.
A Shorten Labor Government will not proceed with funding the Perth Freight Link project.
Instead, we will undertake proper planning for Perth’s container capacity as Infrastructure Australia has proposed.
We will also retain the current $59 million commitment to the Leach Highway upgrade.
This comes on top of the significant local road projects that Labor has already announced, like funding for the North Lake Bridge.
Like those projects, our funding injection for METRONET is a direct investment in jobs that will make Perth a more liveable city.
Only Labor has a plan to get Perth moving because we understand this growing city out west needs the same quality infrastructure and services as other Australians enjoy.
POSITIVE POLICY
A First-Class Stadium For Townsville
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $100 million to build a new Townsville Stadium in partnership with the Queensland Labor Government.
Construction of the project is expected to support over 700 jobs in the region and make a significant boost to the local economy.
For too long, football fans have been watching their Rugby League and other sport at sub-standard facilities compared to football stadiums in southern Queensland and New South Wales.
Labor will change this.
North Queensland and the City of Townsville need a first class sports stadium so that it can compete on the national stage.
Townsville continues to grow as a key northern Australia hub critical to the economy of Far North Queensland.
Modern community infrastructure is critical to local economics, particularly in regional cen-tres, helping to drive economic growth and local jobs.
Townsville Enterprise, a group comprising the Council, local businesses and stakeholders has been actively seeking funding commitments from both the State and Federal Govern-ments and Opposition to replace the ageing stadium.
Labor expects stadium construction to commence by early 2018 with the ground complete for the 2020 NRL season.
This project will be an important boost to the local community, and Labor will work with the Queensland Labor Government and the Council to encourage as much of the work is sourced locally as possible.
Labor’s commitment of $100 million is dollar for dollar with the Queensland Government’s commitment, to ensure that this important project gets off the ground.
This government funding is expected to attract a further $50 million from the Council and the National Rugby League.
Only a Shorten Labor Government will deliver the Townsville stadium that North Queensland’s community deserves.
POSITIVE POLICY
A ‘National Interest Test' For Gas Exports
As Australia makes the transition to becoming the world’s largest Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) exporter, a Shorten Labor Government will introduce a Domestic Gas National Interest Test for new LNG facilities to ensure exporting natural gas is in the interests of all Australians.
The Liberals have refused to recognise the impact that soaring LNG exports are having on Australian businesses, especially manufacturers.
Our National Interest Test will help Australia’s gas exports continue to flourish while ensuring that all the economic costs and benefits, including those impacting manufacturers, are considered when assessing LNG project expansions.
Australia stands to reap huge rewards from our growing LNG export industry.
Only Labor can be trusted to ensure that these benefits flow to the entire Australian community, including Australian industry.
POSITIVE POLICY
Western Sydney Night 'No-Fly Zone'
Labor will act to ensure there is no noise impact on existing residences and communities from night time flights as part of Badgerys Creek Airport master planning.
This will be a part of a comprehensive aircraft noise mitigation plan.
This will ensure Western Sydney benefits from the economic boost Sydney’s second airport will deliver – including thousands of jobs – while communities aren't disturbed by night time aircraft noise.
We will ensure that approach and departure flight paths at night are directed away from residential areas.
Permissible night time flights at Kingsford Smith Airport are not allowed to fly over built up areas.
This will also apply at Badgerys Creek under a Shorten Labor Government.
This will amount to a “no-fly zone” at night, similar to that which operates at Kingsford-Smith Airport.
These flight path designations are easily achievable during the low capacity periods at night at Badgerys Creek Airport.
Labor will also ask for proven noise mitigation measures such as the landscaping that acts as a noise sponge at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam to be incorporated in the construction of Badgerys Creek Airport to ensure it is environmental best practice.
We will also ensure there is no concentration of aircraft flight paths over any particular community, as per best practice in other Australian airports.
Labor’s community consultation plan adopted in government will ensure that there is ongoing community input into the operation of the airport.
Labor is committed to ensuring that there is rail access to Badgerys Creek Airport and the employment lands in the region from the beginning of the operation of the airport.
We will also ensure that there is a local employment plan to ensure Western Sydney residents benefit from the jobs generated at the airport.
POSITIVE POLICY
Brisbane Roads Package (M1 and Ipswich)
M1 upgrade
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $168 million to upgrade the Gateway-M1 merge to ease congestion and boost productivity in one of the fast-growing regions of Queensland.
With congestion in this busy area frequently causing long queues and delays for motorists, Labor will add additional southbound lanes on the M1 between Eight Mile Plans and Springwood to improve the merge with the Gateway Motorway.
Under existing conditions, seven lanes merge into three at this bottleneck.
The $210 million upgrade, to be delivered in conjunction with the Queensland Labor Government, will significantly improve productivity by reducing travelling times, not just for commuters, but also for trucks moving freight around the region.
The upgrade is the perfect example of how the Commonwealth can work with state governments to unlock productivity gains and significantly improve liveability in our cities.
Labor will put people in the Brisbane-Logan-Gold Coast corridor first by lowering traffic build-up and easing congestion on this nationally significant highway.
The project is already listed on Infrastructure Australia’s national priority list.
Traffic congestion remains one of the nation’s most-serious economic challenges, with Infrastructure Australia warning the problem will cost the nation $53 billion a year in lost productivity without action now.
A Shorten Labor Government will confront the problem head-on by investing in strategically important road projects as well as the public transport that is needed to take cars off our busy roads.
It contrast the Abbott-Turnbull Government has failed to achieve progress on major road projects, actually cutting investment in the important upgrades of the Bruce and Pacific Highways.
These failures are reflected in Australian Bureau of Statistics figures showing public sector infrastructure investment fell by 20 per cent between the September quarter of 2013 and the September quarter of 2015.
Labor has a strong record of investing in the M1, with millions of dollars’ worth of upgrades to the road paid for and completed when we were last in Government.
Despite the Liberals’ big talk on the M1, they haven’t provided a single cent for upgrades since taking office.
Ipswich
A Shorten Labor Government will match the Queensland Labor Government’s $200 million commitment to the first stage of upgrading the Ipswich Motorway between Rocklea and Darra to tackle traffic congestion on Brisbane’s southside.
The project scope includes:
Upgrading Ipswich Motorway from four to six lanes between Granard Road and Oxley Road
New southern service road connection from Rocklea industrial precinct to the Oxley commercial and retail areas
Seven new bridges, plus major culverts
Suscatand Street intersection traffic signals
Active transport improvements.
This important project will boost the capacity of the Ipswich Motorway from four lanes to six between Granard and Oxley roads, reducing travelling times for 85,000 motorists who use it each day, including 12,000 trucks hauling freight.
Labor committed to this upgrade in 2013.
But the incoming Turnbull-Abbott Government has failed to advance the project.
Last year’s Infrastructure Australia Audit identified the direct cost of congestion along this corridor at up to $40 million a year in 2011 and increasing.
The project is on Infrastructure Australia’s Priority List.
It’s time to get it done.
With south-east Queensland continuing to grow strongly, it is critical that our roads and railway lines are efficient or traffic congestion will impede economic growth and reduce job creation.
The Turnbull-Abbott Government has reduced infrastructure investment over the past three years.
Australian Bureau of Statistics figures showing public sector infrastructure investment fell 20 per cent between the September quarter of 2013 and the September quarter of 2015.
A Shorten Labor Government will get infrastructure delivery back on track, not only to lift productivity, but also to provide relief for millions of Australian commuters who already spend too long in their cars.
The former Labor Government spent over $2 billion on earlier stages of the Ipswich Motorway between 2007 and 2013.
POSITIVE POLICY
Hobart Airport Infrastructure
An elected Labor Government will invest $32 million to upgrade the Hobart Airport Roundabout to ease congestion and boost tourism and trade.
This project will reduce travel times for local residents and visitors, increase productivity for truck freight, enhance trade opportunities for local producers, and improve access to the commercial precinct
The $40 million project will deliver a grade-separated overpass to remove the current bottleneck and allow free movement of vehicles on the Tasman Highway.
Residents living in Midway Point, Sorell and Forcett will be the key beneficiaries of reduced travel times and less congestion.
The funding is based on the State Government contributing $8 million to get the job done.
The Hobart Airport is also the main gateway to Tasmania with two million passengers entering the state by air every year.
With passenger numbers forecast to increase by 130 per cent and aircraft movements expected to double over the next 20 years, there has never been a more important time to invest in infrastructure in Tasmania.
Traffic around the airport will also more than double over the coming decade making tackling congestion and boosting productivity critical tasks to supporting growth.
The upgraded Hobart Roundabout will also help drive growth in Tasmania’s booming aquaculture industry, which relies on efficient access to the airport for airfreight of high value, high perishable produce.
In stark contrast the Coalition has failed Tasmanians, cutting Midland Highway funding by $100 million, the Rail Revitalisation Program by $60 million and failing to commit a single new dollar of infrastructure funding during its three years in office.
Tasmanians know that the only way their state will receive the infrastructure funding it needs to support jobs and growth is with a Federal Labor Government.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor’s $500 Million Commitment To Adelaide Jobs And Infrastructure
A Shorten Labor Government will create 2000 jobs in Adelaide by investing in the AdeLINK project.
Labor will invest $500 million to kick start this project, giving the South Australian economy and local workforce a much-needed boost.
AdeLINK will create local jobs today and give an opportunity for South Australians to develop skills to do the jobs of the future
Critically, Labor’s support for this project will reenergise the local workforce and create 2000 jobs over the construction life of the entire project.
Developing public transport infrastructure is critical to plans to ease congestion and reduce pressure on inner city roads in Adelaide.
Adelaide needs a public transport system which supports the future of Adelaide.
According to Infrastructure Australia, without additional funding for transport in Adelaide, the cost of delays in urban transport will quadruple from $1 billion in 2011 to $4 billion by 2031.
The State Government is currently preparing a detailed business case for the construction of the AdeLINK tram network.
The business case will include planning, design, and identification of the precise tram routes and stops, as well as environmental and land value capture benefits.
AdeLINK is already on the Infrastructure Australia Priority List as a priority initiative in the next five years.
Labor has a strong commitment to the local steel industry, and local steel jobs.
Labor’s contribution to the AdeLINK project will be consistent with our Plan for Australian Metals Manufacturing and Jobs, which requires all federally-funded projects to use steel that meets Australian standards and certification requirements.
This $500 million announcement, together with additional funding from the South Australian Government and local councils, will provide significant opportunities to leverage private sector involvement.
The $10 billion Infrastructure Finance Facility announced by Bill Shorten in October last year will also be able to allocate additional concessional finance.
Unlike the Coalition, Labor will not cut other projects in South Australia to fund projects.
The Coalition’s recent Tonsley line announcement was funded by cutting an Infrastructure Australia approved grade separation project at Torrens Junction.
The Liberals have added no jobs and done nothing to address the 20% fall in public sector infrastructure work that has occurred under their watch.
Labor is committed to creating jobs in South Australia
and growing the South Australian economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
Boosting Rail Freight at Port Botany
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $175 million to unclog freight rail bottlenecks at Port Botany which are currently costing jobs across Sydney.
Australia’s economic prosperity is tied to our ability to minimise bottlenecks in the logistics chain and Port Botany is vital to that.
Labor understands this and will invest in the infrastructure needed to create jobs and boost operations at this important trade hub.
As a main gateway for container freight, unclogging Port Botany is a priority project for the future of Sydney industries, and central to boosting employment in the industry.
The full Port Botany Rail Freight Upgrade Program aims to take 300,000 trucks off the road each year by shifting containers to rail.
Duplicating the Rail will free up the movement of goods for exporters and importers, reduce logistics costs and boost capacity, productivity and jobs across industries that rely on container movements through the Port.
Sydney’s freight task is growing.
The more freight that travels by rail, the less congested the roads around Port Botany, including the M5, will be.
Only about 14 per cent of containers that arrive at the Port are currently carried by rail.
Labor’s investment will help the Australian Rail and Track Corporation (ARTC) achieve its target to take a higher percentage of containers on rail into and out of the Port.
The funding will also provide for a crossing loop at Warwick Farm in Sydney’s West, facilitating better movement by rail of containers and improving efficiency in south-western Sydney.
The funding is subject to an Infrastructure Australia assessment of the business case.
The $175 million is by way of equity injection into the ARTC, and will not have an impact on the underlying cash balance or fiscal balance.
Upgrading the freight rail line out of Port Botany is on the Infrastructure Australia Priority List for addressing in the near term – Labor is committed to acting as soon as possible to boost the Port’s capacity.
Developing the Port is good for local jobs, it is good for the economy and it is good for Australia.
Labor understands that an investment in infrastructure is an investment in local jobs.
POSITIVE POLICY
NBN - National Broadband Network
Labor is the nation building party.
From the Snowy Mountains Scheme to the National Broadband Network, Labor builds the infrastructure for the jobs of the future.
The original Labor National Broadband Network would have delivered optic fibre to 93 per cent of homes and businesses, providing speeds of up to one gigabit per second on a network easily scalable to much higher speeds in the future.
It would have provided our nation’s businesses, entrepreneurs, students and scientists with the tools they needed to compete in the global economy of the 21st century.
In 2013, Malcolm Turnbull scrapped Labor’s world class fibre-to-the-premises NBN.
Instead the Liberals are building a slower, second-rate copper NBN that will leave Australia behind and hamstring our economy into the future.
In the last three years Australia has plummeted from 30th in the world for internet speeds to 60th.
We are now behind most of Europe.
We are behind most of Asia.
We are behind the United States and Canada and New Zealand.
We are even behind Romania, Russia, Poland and Slovakia.
Due to the mess Malcolm Turnbull has made of this critical infrastructure project, Labor’s original plan for the NBN can no longer be achieved in one stage.
The Liberals have sunk $15 billion into the NBN in the last three years, and much of the initial build is under contract.
A Shorten Labor Government will deal with Malcolm Turnbull’s mess in two ways.
First, we will scale up the rollout of fibre-to-the-premises and phase out the rollout of fibre-to-the-node.
Construction of fibre-to-the-node will cease when the current pipeline of construction work is completed and design and construction of fibre-to-the-premises is scaled back up.
This will deliver fibre-to-the-premises to up to two million homes and businesses during the initial build that would otherwise get Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper version.
Second, a Shorten Labor Government will commission Infrastructure Australia, with input from relevant experts, to manage the development of a plan that outlines how and when the parts of Australia left with Mr Turnbull’s second-rate NBN should be transitioned to fibre-to-the-premises.
You can’t have an innovation boom while you are still buffering.
We must get our broadband infrastructure right to be competitive in the region and globally.
Our neighbours in the region – Japan, South Korea, Singapore, even New Zealand – are all rolling out fibre networks.
Labor will ensure that Australia has the digital infrastructure we need to create the jobs of the future – right here in Australia.
POSITIVE POLICY
Western Sydney Rail
A Shorten Labor Government will tackle traffic congestion in western Sydney by building a missing rail link, connecting the north-west and south-west of Sydney, via the second Sydney Airport.
When complete, Sydneysiders will have a passenger rail network that allows north-south rail travel across western Sydney, and an outer orbital rail network.
Labor’s Western Sydney rail package includes $400 million made available to the New South Wales Government to get the project underway.
The funding will allow planning and construction to run parallel with the development of the airport.
This initial funding will create over 1,000 local jobs in planning and construction.
The project will help drive development in western Sydney potentially including value capture, including at the new airport.
Potential other points along the route include the Sydney Science Park and University of Western Sydney campuses.
Sydney is a rapidly growing city.
Infrastructure Australia forecasts that 84 per cent of New South Wales’ population increase will occur in Sydney.
Currently, most commuters travelling between home and work outside of the CBD have little practical choice other than to drive.
The second Sydney airport is estimated to host up to 9,000 permanent jobs by 2030, which is why it is so important to invest in the vital infrastructure to ensure people in western Sydney have access to these jobs.
The Abbott-Turnbull Liberal Government cut funding to public transport when they were elected, and are now trying to play catch up.
Since the Liberals were elected public sector infrastructure funding has fallen across Australia.
We’ve lost three years under the Liberals, and Australia can’t afford to lose any more.
Labor is the party of nation-building. Our infrastructure investments in growth areas will ensure that Western Sydney has the rail it needs to manage its growth and drive job creation.
Infrastructure Australia lists a Western Sydney Airport public transport connection as one of its national priorities.
Labor’s commitments are contingent on a positive assessment from Infrastructure Australia, consistent with our position that all major infrastructure projects need to go through a thorough and detailed assessment prior to securing funds.
These infrastructure projects are an important part of Labor’s cities policy.
Labor believes that the Federal Government should be involved in cities.
With 80 per cent of Australians living in cities, how we plan and design our cities is vital to making them productive, sustainable and livable.
The proposed connection has support from local councils and the National Growth Areas Alliance.
A Shorten Labor Government will work to get people out of traffic and to their destination quicker.
POSITIVE POLICY
Melbourne Metro & Park-and-Ride Infrastructure
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in public transport infrastructure in Melbourne which will manage a fast growing population and drive job creation.
If elected, Labor will commit $500 million to support the Melbourne Metro Tunnel project and a Park and Ride Access Fund.
The Metro Tunnel project will directly target capacity constraints in Melbourne’s public transport network, adding to the liveability of the city of Melbourne.
The project will add capacity to Melbourne’s existing public transport network.
Five new underground stations will be built and 65 new high-capacity trains will be added.
This investment will take pressure off the existing City Loop, allowing more trains to travel in and out of the CBD.
This will not only benefit the Melbourne inner-city, but Greater Melbourne, which will have more regular services and travel options.
Labor will invest $120 million in a Park and Ride Access Fund to boost car parking capacity at high use train stations, and make funding available for new stations where demand growth is expected.
Dedicated cycle facilities will also be incorporated in these projects.
Up to 12,000 commuter car spaces will be enabled by this investment.
Labor’s investment will take the total federal contribution to the Metro and the Park and Ride Fund to $1.35 billion.
This commitment is made contingent on a positive assessment from Infrastructure Australia, consistent with Labor’s requirement that all major infrastructure projects need to go through a thorough and detailed assessment prior to securing funds.
These infrastructure projects are an important part of Labor’s cities policy.
Labor believes that the Federal Government should be involved in Cities.
With 80 per cent of Australians living in cities, how we plan and design our cities is vital to making them productive, sustainable and liveable.
Only Labor will build the transport infrastructure that the residents of Melbourne will need in the future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Brisbane's Cross River Rail
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in the Brisbane Cross River Rail Project which will ease congestion, improve transport connections and create local jobs for a growing Brisbane population.
The project will create an estimated 8,000 jobs and the focus on infrastructure investment will increase the capacity of the entire Brisbane public transport network, getting ahead of growth.
Labor will provide $800 million towards the Cross River Rail, subject to a positive business case and finalised negotiations with the State Government and the new delivery authority.
Labor’s announcement follows the State Government’s announcement in its 2016 Budget that it will establish a delivery authority which will obtain environmental approvals and commence scoping of value share opportunities, early works and pre-procurement activities for the transformative project.
The Cross River rail project includes a 10.2 kilometre link from Dutton Park to Bowen Hills, with 5.9 kilometres of tunnel under the Brisbane River and CBD.
It will connect to northern and southern rail networks, providing significant benefits to commuters from both directions.
Stations will be developed at five key locations: Boggo Road, Woolloongabba, Albert Street, Roma Street and the Exhibition showgrounds.
Brisbane is Australia’s third largest city.
Without an effective transport system providing access to jobs, Brisbane’s economic output could be restricted by about $69 billion between 2015 and 2031.
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver the infrastructure that Queensland needs to manage its strong growth and drive job creation.
In addition, a Shorten Labor Government will work with the State Government to access Labor’s $10 billion Infrastructure Finance Facility, which was announced in 2015, to determine whether innovative financing options are available to unlock federal funds.
Working in conjunction with the State Labor Government, a Shorten Labor Government will honour its strong commitment to the local steel industry and local steel jobs by maximising the use of Australian steel in all federally-funded projects.
When they were elected, the Abbott-Turnbull Liberal Government cut all funding to new public transport projects, including to Cross River Rail, and since its election, public sector infrastructure investment across Australia has fallen.
We have lost three years on public transport in Brisbane under the Liberals and cannot afford to lose any more wasted infrastructure years under a Liberal Government.
Labor is the party of nation-building.
Our investments will help the people of Queensland get their fair share of federal funding for infrastructure.
Labor’s commitments are contingent on a positive assessment from Infrastructure Australia, consistent with our position that all major infrastructure projects need to go through a thorough and detailed assessment prior to securing funds.
This project is an important part of Labor’s cities policy.
Labor believes that the Federal Government should be involved in cities.
With 80 per cent of Australians living in cities, how we plan and design our cities is vital to making them productive, sustainable and livable.
Only Labor will build the transport infrastructure that the residents of Brisbane will need in the future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Melbourne Roads
A Shorten Labor Government will tackle traffic congestion in Melbourne through targeted investment aimed at addressing growth.
Working in partnership with the Andrews Labor Government, federal Labor’s Melbourne Roads Package will boost productivity right across the state after three years of Liberal neglect.
Labor’s Melbourne Roads Package includes: $262 million for works on roads in growth areas of outer Melbourne, including Thompsons Road, O’Herns Road, Craigieburn Road and Bridge Inn Road.
$510 million to improve efficiency on the Monash Freeway.
$356 million to complete the upgrade of the M80 Ringroad.
Melbourne is growing quickly.
Between 2011 and 2031, its population is expected to grow by 1,700 people a week and the state’s freight carrying task is expected to nearly double in the same period.
We must invest now to provide the infrastructure to meet this projected growth or risk traffic congestion damaging the economy and reducing our capacity to create jobs.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government has courted conflict with Victoria, particularly over the scrapped East-West Link, which would have provided a paltry 45 cents in economic benefit for every dollar invested.
Its failure to deliver major projects is reflected in Australian Bureau of Statistics figures showing that public sector infrastructure investment fell by 20 per cent between the September quarter of 2013 and the September quarter of 2015.
A federal Labor Government will end the needless conflict.
We’ll get on with delivering the roads that Melbourne needs to manage its strong growth and drive job creation.
Labor is the party of nation-building.
Our investments will help Victoria get its fair share of federal funding for infrastructure.
We will also ensure that all major investments are subject to proper cost-benefit analysis ticked off by the independent Infrastructure Australia.
The last thing Victoria needs is another planning disaster like the East-West Link, a dud project funded by the Liberals without cost-benefit analysis.
There is a separate policy on the Melbourne Metro and Park and Ride Commuter Infrastructure.
POSITIVE POLICY
Victorian Regional Transport
Our Victorian Regional Transport Package includes $220 million for the Murray Basin Rail project to meet increasing demand for rail freight services as well as a $350 million regional roads package.
Between 2011 and 2031, Victoria’s freight carrying task is expected to nearly double.
We must invest now to provide the infrastructure to meet this projected growth or risk traffic congestion damaging the economy and reducing our capacity to create jobs.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government has courted conflict with Victoria, particularly over the scrapped East-West Link, which would have provided a paltry 45 cents in economic benefit for every dollar invested.
Its failure to deliver major projects is reflected in Australian Bureau of Statistics figures showing that public sector infrastructure investment fell by 20 per cent between the September quarter of 2013 and the September quarter of 2015.
A federal Labor Government will end the needless conflict.
We’ll get on with delivering the railways and roads that Victoria needs to manage its strong growth and drive job creation.
Labor is the party of nation-building.
Our investments will help Victoria get its fair share of federal funding for infrastructure.
We will also ensure that all major investments are subject to proper cost-benefit analysis ticked off by the independent Infrastructure Australia.
The last thing Victoria needs is another planning disaster like the East-West Link, a dud project funded by the Liberals without cost-benefit analysis.
POSITIVE POLICY
Boost for Central & North Queensland Roads
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver record funding to improve road safety, boost productivity and make life easier for North and Central Queenslanders.
If elected, Labor will deliver the following road upgrades: Gladstone Port Access Road – next stage ($80 million).
Walkerston Bypass ($150 million).
Rockhampton-Yeppoon Road ($30 million).
Hann Highway ($43 million).
Capricorn Highway Overtaking Lanes ($19 million).
Capricorn Highway – Rockhampton to Gracemere ($75 million).
Rockhampton (Bajool to Port Alma Road) Port Access Road ($15 million).
Cairns Airport Access Upgrade ($6 million).
The funding for these roads will come from the Northern Australia Roads Program, which is already in the Budget.
Despite the Abbott-Turnbull Government talking big about infrastructure in the north, they have failed to deliver a single new major infrastructure project for Northern Australia during its term.
Australian Bureau of Statistics figures show that from the September 2013 to September 2015 public sector infrastructure work fell by 20 per cent under the Liberals.
In Queensland this included significant cuts to the Bruce Highway.
It’s simply not good enough.
Queensland is a large state which relies heavily on roads for the movement of people and freight.
North and Central Queenslanders also rely upon roads to connect their communities and provide access to services.
While the Abbott-Turnbull Government stood still on Queensland infrastructure, Labor stands on its record.
The former Labor Government provided $8.7 billion of infrastructure investment in Queensland between 2007-2013, doubling spending from $143 to $314 per person.
Only a Shorten Labor Government will deliver the infrastructure that Queensland needs to boost exports, create local jobs, drive growth and keep people safe on the roads.
POSITIVE POLICY
Bass Strait Interconnector
A Shorten Labor Government will fast-track the development of a business case for a second Bass Strait interconnector, delivering greater energy security and more job opportunities for Tasmanians.
Tasmania has some of the best renewable resources in the world, and already produces 17 per cent of Australia’s renewable energy output.
However, Tasmania’s own energy supply is not as secure as it should be, and there are limited opportunities to grow the sector.
The energy crisis that Tasmanians experienced this year – with the shutdown of the single interconnector – should not be allowed to happen again.
A second cable will protect the energy security of Tasmanian businesses and households, as well as opening up new economic opportunities.
A second link across the Bass Strait will expand Tasmania’s access to the National Electricity Market.
This will boost the capacity of Tasmania’s renewable energy generators to boost supply and local jobs.
If elected, Labor will work with the Tasmanian Government to develop a business case for the second interconnector for urgent consideration by Infrastructure Australia.
Labor will provide $5 million for the development of the business case, which will build on the existing feasibility study.
Subject to a positive business case and an assessment by Infrastructure Australia, up to $500 million will be made available through our Infrastructure Financing Facility for the construction of the second cable.
The project will be funded and delivered in partnership with the Tasmanian Government and the private sector.
Exporting Tasmania’s renewable energy to the rest of Australia is the key to new investment in Tasmania and new jobs for Tasmanians.
Labor believes Tasmania can become the renewable energy powerhouse of Australia – and we have a plan to make it happen.
A second Bass Strait interconnector is one part of Labor’s energy plan for Tasmania.
Labor has a comprehensive plan to boost investment and jobs in renewable energy, including: Ensuring that at least 50 per cent of the nation’s electricity is sourced from renewable energy by 2030.
Expanding the investment mandate of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
Ensuring the Commonwealth Government leads by example as a direct purchaser of renewable energy.
Labor’s energy plan is good for Tasmania’s energy security, good for Tasmanian businesses and.
good for Tasmanian jobs
Acting on climate change, protecting the environment
The key to tackling climate change is to drastically increase our investment in renewable energies like solar.
That is why we’ll commit to 50% renewable energy by 2030 because it will cut pollution, help create jobs of the future and lower energy prices.
POSITIVE POLICY
Net Zero Pollution by 2050
Labor has set a long term goal of net zero pollution by 2050.
This will ensure Australia delivers on the global, bipartisan goal of limiting global warming to well below two degrees Celsius on pre-industrial levels.
If we do not act, Australia will continue to experience an increase in extreme weather events, more severe droughts and rising sea levels.
All of which will come at an incredibly high cost to our economy, our environment and our way of life.
Labor accepts the science that limiting global warming to well below two degrees Celsius is necessary to avert dangerous climate change.
That commitment requires Australia to be a net zero pollution economy by the middle of the century.
Transitioning Australia to a net zero emissions economy by 2050 requires a decarbonisation pathway.
Under Labor, this pathway will have a number of milestone targets to ensure that Australia is on-track.
Experts, the environment sector and vulnerable nations strongly advocate for five year pledge and review arrangements and the UK, US, China and France have also proposed this.
A Shorten Labor Government will implement a five yearly pledge and review mechanism to assess progress and to adjust commitments over time.
To achieve the target of net zero pollution by 2050, Labor has set a target at 2030 for a 45 per cent reduction in carbon pollution on 2005 levels.
And within a year of coming to Government we will also put in place a 2025 target.
A 45% target is in line with recommendation of the Climate Change Authority and is the minimum level required to ensure that Australia can deliver and remains consistent with the objective in the Paris Agreement of keeping global warming to well below two degrees Celsius.
Labor will also continue to support the independence and expert-led Climate Change Authority.
That is why Labor will commit $17.4 million over the forward estimates to reverse the Government’s abolition of the Climate Change Authority and ensure that it continues to be appropriately resourced to achieve its role.
POSITIVE POLICY
50% Renewables by 2030
Climate change is driving the most profound restructuring of the world economy this century – the transition from fossil fuel based energy to renewable energy.
The transition is happening now and it is accelerating.
With the right policies the renewable energy sector provides immense opportunities: it will drive jobs creation, drive manufacturing investment and put downward pressure on power prices for families and small businesses.
A Shorten Labor Government understands the fundamental importance of this transition and the massive opportunities it brings.
We will put a strong renewable energy sector at the centre of Australia’s response to the challenge of climate change.
Transitioning electricity generation to renewable energy is also critical to dealing with carbon pollution.
The electricity sector accounts for 33 per cent of Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions – the single biggest source of emissions.
That’s why a Shorten Labor Government will: Ensure that 50% of the nation’s electricity is sourced from renewable energy by 2030;
Provide certainty and flexibility with less red tape and more technology options for investment to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation;
Provide $206.6m to ARENA to support a specific Concentrated Solar Thermal funding round;
Establish a Community Power Network and Regional Hubs at a cost of $98.7m over four years; and
Ensure the Commonwealth Government leads by example as a direct purchaser of renewable energy.
The Liberal Government has done everything in its power to try and destroy Australia’s share in one of the world’s fastest growing industries with devastating consequences for our country.
In the last two years more than 2 million renewable energy jobs were added to the global economy, but over the same period 2,600 jobs were lost in Australia.
In 2014, clean energy investment grew in China (32 per cent), the US (8 per cent), Japan (12 per cent), Germany (3 per cent) and the UK (3 per cent).
But over the same period, investment in large scale renewables dropped by 88 per cent in Australia– from over $2 billion to around $240 million.
A strong renewable energy sector will be at the centre of Labor’s response to the challenges of climate change.
With the right policies the renewable energy sector also provides immense opportunities: it will drive jobs creation, drive manufacturing investment and put downward pressure on power prices for families and small businesses.
Labor’s 50 per cent target includes not just large-scale renewables but small and industry based generation.
The existing LRET and SRES schemes will continue operate to 2020 as per current legislation.
We want to see solar panels become the norm on the roof-tops of Australian homes and businesses, with millions more to be built and installed over the next 15 years.
We want to see battery technology continue to improve so that electricity from solar panels can be stored in most homes and small businesses to lower power bills.
We want to make sure that investors in windfarms and other renewable energy generators can be confident about investing.
Setting a long term signal for renewable energy will attract investment.
Over $2.5 trillion is expected to be invested in renewables in the Asia Pacific region to 2030 – it’s our job to make sure that that investment is made here.
The renewable energy and energy storage industries present an enormous economic opportunity of the next several decades.
POSITIVE POLICY
Animal Testing Ban
Animal testing of cosmetic ingredients is legal in Australia, but in practice it is rarely conducted here.
The large majority of cosmetics that sit on our shelves contain an ingredient or ingredients that, at some point, have been tested on animals.
Mostly, these ingredients have been tested on animals overseas.
Often, results from animal tests are used to verify products so they can be brought into the Australian market.
Animal testing is conducted on rabbits, guinea pigs, mice, rats and other animals.
The tests used to ascertain the safety of cosmetic ingredients often subject animals to pain and distress without pain relief (due to potential interference with test results).
Testing includes testing for skin irritation, dripping ingredients into the eyes of animals, testing for skin sensitisation, tests for allergies, etc.
There are no reliable figures on how many animals die each year as a result of animal testing, but the RSPCA estimates that tens of thousands of animals are tested each year.
Animals Australia believes that far more animals die each year as a result of cosmetic testing.
Labor will ban animal testing in Australia for cosmetic purposes and ban the sale in Australia of cosmetics and cosmetic ingredients that have been tested on animals.
The law should reflect the ethics of the community.
It’s clear that the vast majority of Australians don’t believe animals should suffer for better lipstick or cleanser.
Our policy is about the phased in prevention of animal testing.
Animal testing that has already occurred is not subject to the Bill, and cosmetics that are already available in Australia will continue to be available.
The registration process for new chemicals will be amended so that, in the case of a new cosmetic ingredient, the National Industrial Chemicals Notification and Assessment Scheme (NICNAS) must be notified of a substance’s animal testing history during the application process.
Under the proposed policy, if animal testing is found to have occurred it cannot be registered.
Our policy will be phased-in in over three years, allowing NICNAS time to develop alternative testing means and allow industry to change their current processes if required.
POSITIVE POLICY
Cut Pollution – Emissions Trading Scheme
If climate change continues unmitigated over the coming years, it will cause serious and damaging economic dislocation across the world, with Australia set to suffer the worst consequences.
For Australia, unmitigated climate change will come at a huge economic cost, not least of which will include severe and damaging impacts to the nation’s infrastructure and the death of ecosystems such as the Great Barrier Reef.
Australia needs to reduce pollution and take serious action against dangerous climate change.
That’s why a Shorten Labor Government will: Introduce a domestic emissions trading scheme that will have two distinct phases.
The first phase is designed to get Australia’s pollution levels back under control and to establish the architecture for an enduring ETS.
The second phase will then drive the long-term transition in our economy;
Phase one of the ETS will operate for two years, from 1 July 2018 until 30 June 2020 to align with the second (and final) commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol;
Phase two of the ETS will operate from 1 July 2020.
Pollution levels will be capped and reduced over the course of the decade in line with Australia’s international commitments under the Paris agreement;
The broader ETS does not apply to the electricity sector (see separate fact sheet on Cleaner Power Generation); and
The scheme will allow business to work out the cheapest and most effective way to operate and will not involve taxpayers handing over billions of dollars to Australia’s large polluters.
Climate change does not just pose a threat to the ecosystems and infrastructure at risk, the costs will be more real and wide ranging.
Unabated climate change will cause huge upheaval in financial markets across the world, markets which underpin the wealth of Australians and the retirement incomes of Australia’s ageing population.
Recent studies have put the cost of unmitigated climate change to investors around the world at US$2.4-US$24 trillion.
Ambitious global mitigation action is necessary to avert this pending environmental and economic crisis.
Recent global agreements have been positive.
At the Paris climate change meetings, governments around the world, including Australia agreed to limit temperature rises well below 2 degrees Celsius whilst also acknowledging the need to for global emissions to peak as soon as possible.
POSITIVE POLICY
Cleaner Power Generation
A transition is needed to modernise Australia’s electricity sector.
Labor’s plan will establish an orderly pathway for this transition.
Australia’s electricity generation sector is the largest source of carbon pollution in the economy, producing around one third of the nation’s pollution.
It simply must get cleaner.
To achieve this, a Shorten Labor Government will: Ensure the National Electricity Market meets the needs of 21st century consumers through an Electricity Modernisation Review;
Develop a plan to ensure the orderly transition of Australia’s energy generation from polluting coal-fired power stations to renewable and clean energy, with a core focus on supporting workers and communities
; and implement an electricity emissions trading scheme
Labor’s plan will drive billions of dollars in new investment in renewable energy in Australia - boosting our generation capacity and re-shaping the energy mix that powers our businesses and households.
This step up in renewable energy capacity will mean that old, heavy polluting power stations will become less and less a feature of Australia’s energy future.
This shift will require a framework to ensure that the transition is orderly, so that the hand over from old to new sources of generation is in the best interests of the economy and consumers.
This framework will need to be designed to strengthen and modernise the National Electricity Market (NEM).
Labor is proposing a standalone approach for cutting pollution in the electricity sector.
Labor recognises that the electricity sector is unique to the economy, and so this package of measures has been structured to best meet our climate change targets in the most efficient way.
Labor has designed policy settings to strengthen energy security, apply downward pressure on power prices, and drive the transition to clean sources of power.
POSITIVE POLICY
Increased Energy Efficiency
For Australia to build a strong economy we need to lift productivity across the board.
Energy is a key input and significant, growing driver of costs in our economy.
That is why we need to put in place strategies to ensure that energy – like labour, capital and other economic inputs – is used efficiently and productively.
To achieve this, a Shorten Labor Government will: Double Australia’s energy productivity by 2030;
Introduce new emissions standards for motor vehicles to reduce emissions in the transport sector;
Support policies that reduce per capita environmental impacts in our cities, including more efficient building design and public transport systems;
and Broaden Infrastructure Australia’s role to include new assessment criteria of smart infrastructure and sustainability.
We need to have an energy system that is secure, reliable and sustainable while also being efficient and affordable.
Boosting our energy productivity helps lift our overall competitiveness.
It will reduce costs for business, improve profitability of enterprise and free up capital for investment and job creation.
Improving energy productivity is also key to decarbonising Australia's economy while maintaining economic growth.
Australia remains a relatively energy-intensive economy by OECD standards.
Energy productivity improvements in recent years have been poor, against both OECD and G20 averages.
Over the past two decades, for example, China has improved its energy productivity twice as fast as Australia.
We currently sit in the bottom quartile of OECD nations on this important economic measure.
Australia’s relatively poor performance has been exacerbated by large increases in energy costs in recent years - electricity in the past decade and gas more recently.
Energy costs grew by two thirds in the decade to 2011-12 - from $72 billion to $120 billion, which is close to the total private sector labour costs for the whole of Queensland.
Over that same decade, average energy prices rose by 38 per cent, while productivity only increased by 16 per cent.
Improving energy productivity can make a significant difference to improvements on overall economic productivity.
Strong performance in energy productivity has multiple benefits - reducing pollution and reducing costs for households and business, and driving growth in the national economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
Carbon Capture on the Land
The farming sector has made the most substantial contribution to emissions reduction in Australia over the past twenty years, largely through the land clearing restrictions placed on the sector at State level as well as the successful Carbon Farming Initiative implemented by the last Labor Government.
It is in the national interest that the sector be able to exploit the new, enhanced export opportunities in a way that is consistent with responsible land management.
The land and agricultural sector represent Australia’s largest opportunity in coming years to sequester carbon pollution (through soil carbon methods, re-afforestation, avoided deforestation and more).
That’s why a Shorten Labor Government will: Work with stakeholders to develop an appropriate “trigger” in federal environmental protection laws to cover Australia’s national and international commitments around climate change;
Require the adoption of consistent reporting of land and tree clearing across States and the Commonwealth;
Reinvigorate the COAG National Vegetation Management Framework;
And Reinvigorate the Carbon Farming Initiative.
Climate change will severely impact on those families, farmers and businesses that depend on natural resources, like agriculture and forestry for their livelihoods.
That’s because climate change means longer droughts in parts of Australia estimated, from 2020, to cost Australia $7.3 billion annually - reducing GDP by 1 per cent, per annum, broken by more damaging floods, more frequent bushfires and more severe storms.
Australia achieved our first commitment under the Kyoto Protocol to restrain carbon pollution (to 108% of 1990 levels by 2012) because of a significant reduction in land sector emissions.
These are known technically as “land use, land use change and forestry” or LULUCF.
The Kyoto Protocol only set binding targets for pollution reduction on developed nations, and most of them had stopped land clearing a long time ago.
Australia lobbied hard to allow reductions in land sector emissions to be counted within the Kyoto Protocol.
As a result, that provision is generally described as the “Australia clause”.
Many other developed nations resent such emissions changes being counted, but it was critically important to Australia’s achievement of our first Kyoto commitment.
Excluding LULUCF (which many nations do in counting emissions), Australia’s emissions averaged 130% of 1990 levels (rather than 103%) over the first commitment period (2008-2012).
POSITIVE POLICY
Protecting Animal Welfare And Boosting Agricultural Profitability
Protecting animal welfare and boosting agricultural profitability aren’t competing aims – they support one another.
Labor has a six-point plan to ensure protecting animals is a top priority for every industry that works with them.
A Shorten Labor Government will:
1. Establish an independent Office of Animal Welfare
In government, we will work with the States and Territories to identify the most appropriate structure for an Office of Animal Welfare operating independently of government.
The office would ultimately have responsibility for providing advice and oversight on the full spectrum of animal welfare issues – including issues like kangaroo culling, puppy farms and commercial animal husbandry – with equal buy-in from the Commonwealth, States and Territories.
Labor will also re-establish State and Territory intergovernmental cooperation to ensure animal welfare matters receive the consistent national approach they deserve.
2. Establish an independent Inspector-General of Animal Welfare
We will provide $1 million a year to establish the Inspector-General of Animal Welfare as an independent statutory position operating from within the Department of Agriculture.
The Inspector-General will be responsible for leading the work to establish the independent Office of Animal Welfare.
They will also be responsible for advising on the protection of animals in all Commonwealth-regulated activities, and will report directly to the Minister of the day on issues like live exports, animal welfare standards and guidelines.
3. Renew the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy
Labor will work with the States and Territories, industry and animal welfare groups to update and renew the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy for the coming decade.
We will draw on the best available research and evidence to develop a strategy that confirms Australia as a leader in our region for the care and protection of animals.
4. Review the Exporter Supply Chain Assurance System
The Exporter Supply Chain Assurance System plays a critical role in reassuring Australian agricultural producers, their customers and the broader community that animal welfare is being protected at every stage from the farm gate to the plate.
In government, Labor will conduct a top-to-bottom review of the system to ensure it is working as effectively and efficiently as possible.
5. Provide more transparency and accountability
Under Labor, the Minister for Agriculture will provide quarterly reports to the Parliament on:  New and emerging markets.
The number of head exported.
Any allegations of breaches of animal welfare standards and investigations undertaken.
Any sanctions or other action taken for breaches of Australia’s animal welfare standards.
6. Ban animal testing for cosmetics within Australia and the importation or sale of new products tested on animals overseas
Labor’s national consultations on animal testing in 2014 received more than 13,000 submissions.
Over 90 per cent supported a ban on animal testing for cosmetics, along with the importation of products that use this.
Labor’s plan will re-establish national leadership on animal welfare – filling the void left by the Abbott-Turnbull Government over its time in office.
POSITIVE POLICY
Double The Number Of Indigenous Rangers
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $200 million over 5 years to double the number of Indigenous rangers under the Working on Country program, from 775 in 2016-17 to 1550 in 2020-21.
This is an excellent program that builds on the strong link between Indigenous Australians and the land to improve environmental and cultural conservation and to improve the lives of Indigenous Australians.
Rangers undertake valuable work in endangered species protection, fire management, cultural site management, feral animal control, weed control, environmental monitoring, pollution and climate change impact management and tourism management.
But this program is about more than environmental and cultural conservation work.
Indigenous rangers are role models in their communities, providing a pathway from welfare to work that has been shown to improve Indigenous health, incomes, crime rates and incarceration rates.
It is a program that provides training and real, good jobs in some of the most remote and disadvantaged Indigenous communities in Australia.
Labor is proud of its environmental record and we are proud of our record in tackling Indigenous disadvantage.
Our commitment to double the size of the Indigenous Ranger Program continues our record in both areas.
POSITIVE POLICY
Great Barrier Reef Plan
Labor recognises the huge environmental, social and economic importance of the Great Barrier Reef. We also recognise that this incredible natural wonder is a delicate ecosystem that needs careful study, management, investment and preservation.
The Great Barrier Reef attracts more than 2 million visitors each year, contributes $5.7 billion to the economy, and supports approximately 70,000 jobs.
Since 1985, half the hard coral cover across the reef has been lost due to pressures such as climate change, poor water quality (nutrients, sediments and pesticides), coastal development, extreme weather events including freshwater inundation, ocean acidification and outbreaks of Crown of Thorns Starfish.
The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority provides an assessment of the outlook for the Reef every five years.
The Outlook Report in 2014 found that the overall outlook for the Great Barrier Reef is poor, and the situation has deteriorated since 2009.
The Great Barrier Reef Water Science Taskforce report of May 2016 confirms that Climate Change is the single biggest threat to the Great Barrier Reef.
This is made stark given recent coral bleaching events in the Reef, which are unprecedented in scale and scope.
We face a complex environmental and economic challenge in protecting our Reef for future generations and to rise to that challenge we need to work with all interested and affected parties.
Only Labor has a plan that is equal to this challenge.
Labor’s Great Barrier Reef Plan
Labor’s plan for the Great Barrier Reef represents a $500 million down-payment on a comprehensive and collaborative approach to address all the pressures being faced by this great natural wonder.
Our plan will be implemented in close consultation with the Queensland Government and all other stakeholders, with the Environment Minister taking a direct leadership role in its implementation.
Labor will work with the Queensland Government and stakeholders to implement the recommendations of the Great Barrier Reef Water Science Taskforce report, released in May 2016.
We will do this as part of our Great Barrier Reef Plan.
Our plan has three pillars: Science and Research: Improve science and research and monitoring of reef issues to ensure the protection and sustainability of the Reef is based on the latest, specialised science.
This includes an additional investment in climate and reef science at the CSIRO of $50 million.
Direct Environmental Investment: Integrated direct investment to improve water quality, land management, agricultural and transport sustainability and environmental impacts.
Reef Management: Improve Reef management architecture and incentives to fix the fragmented and uncoordinated approach that has for too long characterised Reef management and conservation.
We must work together and develop an organisational architecture that works effectively and efficiently, with all stakeholders playing their part, if we are to rise to the challenge and truly protect the Reef and restore its health.
Our plan is flexible and it will be implemented to meet the dynamic needs of Reef preservation in a fit for purpose and efficient way.
Through our flexible but considered and collaborative approach, we will ensure the Great Barrier Reef has the very best change to grow as a national environmental and economic asset, generating more jobs, businesses and memories for countless Australian and overseas visitors for generations to come.
POSITIVE POLICY
Community Power Network
Labor knows that as part of Australia’s economic transformation we need to seriously tackle climate change.
All Australians need to be able to benefit from renewable energy solutions in their homes and communities.
But we also know that some people and communities face massive barriers to taking advantage of renewable energy.
Social and community housing, rental properties and apartment-style living all face barriers and to overcome these barriers, we need a government that is willing to act.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will work with the State and Territory Governments to develop a Community Power Network that will draw from the skills and expertise around the country to support the delivery of renewable energy solutions in social and community housing, rental properties and apartment-style living.
The Network will oversee the creation of up to ten Community Power Hubs across Australia that will help local communities access renewable energy.
Community Power Hubs will provide legal and technical expertise and start-up funding to help kick-start clean energy projects across Australia.
The Network will also develop an online community to ensure that ideas, models, business plans, implementation strategies and case studies are freely available to all community energy groups.
Labor will provide $98.7 million over four years to establish the Community Power Network and Community Power Hubs.
This funding includes over $16.0 million per year in competitive grants for community groups to pilot new approaches and demonstration projects in community housing, providing lessons that can then be rolled out nationally through the Network.
POSITIVE POLICY
Government Renewable Energy Power Purchase Agreements
In 2020 the Large Scale Renewable Energy Target and Small Scale Renewable Energy Schemes come to an end.
In order to further boost support for renewables, a Shorten Labor Government will also show leadership in driving the transition to renewable energy by facilitating a process through which the Commonwealth bundles its total energy demand into Power Purchase Agreements (PPA).
PPAs are a key financing mechanism to drive new investment in renewable energy.
The Government is a significant energy user and a Shorten Labor Government will play a direct role in expanding Australia’s renewable energy industry.
To directly drive investment in renewable energy, from 2020 a Shorten Labor Government will work with energy providers to enter into PPAs equal to bringing Commonwealth energy use up to 50% renewable energy by 2030.
These will be 10 to 15 year contracts, and will provide the certainty needed for long term investment in the renewable energy sector.
Labor will consult with the energy industry and regulators in finalising the design of this proposal.
In contrast to Labor’s pro-renewables policies, the Liberals have overseen almost 3,000 renewable energy job losses and in their first year in Government, their anti-renewable stance resulted in an 88 per cent fall in large scale renewable energy investment.
Only Labor has a positive plan to support and grow renewable energy and
grow jobs in this crucial industry
POSITIVE POLICY
Marine Parks: Protecting Our Oceans And Fisheries
Labor understands Australians have a strong connection to our marine life.
The Marine Park plan the last Labor Government put in place created the world’s largest network of marine protected areas in the world – over 2.3 million square kilometres were protected as Commonwealth Marine Parks.
As part of this plan, Labor also released a Fisheries Adjustment Assistance Package to help the commercial fishing industry adjust to the creation of expanded Marine Parks.
A Shorten Labor Government will re-commit to both our expanded network of Marine Parks and a Fisheries Adjustment Package to ensure any impacted fishers will be assisted with any impacts from expanded Marine Parks.
Labor understands that commercial fishing is an extremely important industry to regional communities and the country as a whole.
That is why we’re determined that our Marine Parks do not undermine this industry.
Labor will achieve our marine ecological, economic and social objectives in an open, integrated, participatory and planned manner.
Labor will use modern, best practice public processes like marine spatial planning involving stakeholders in a transparent way, to create and establish a more rational, adaptive and strategic use of marine space and the interactions between its uses.
Protecting penalty rates and your rights at work
Labor believes in weekend penalty rates.
This is a core Labor belief.
That is why Labor will fight to protect your penalty rates and your rights at work.
POSITIVE POLICY
Commonwealth Cleaning Services Guidelines
A Shorten Labor Government will reinstate the Commonwealth Cleaning Services Guidelines, which were callously and heartlessly abolished by the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
The Guidelines will ensure better wages and conditions for cleaners working in Commonwealth buildings by requiring those companies who tender for Commonwealth cleaning contracts to pay cleaners modestly above the award wage.
The decision to abolish the Guidelines is just one of a string of Abbott-Turnbull Government attacks on low paid workers, including delaying the rise in super from 9 to 12 per cent and slashing penalty rates.
In view of the history of underpayment, exploitation and unsafe work practices in the cleaning industry, the former Labor Government identified this sector as requiring special attention to promote fairness, bargaining, freedom of association and other workplace rights.
Our view has not changed.
Cleaners do a fantastic job, and they deserve respect and fair wages and conditions.
They’ll get them under a Shorten Labor Government.
POSITIVE POLICY
Safeguarding Workers Rights
Recent examples of clear and widespread worker exploitation at notable companies have been met by silence and inaction from the Turnbull Government, despite continuous calls from Labor to give more power and resources to the Fair Work Ombudsman.
In 2015 we saw too many instances of workers’ rights trampled, not just by fly-by-night operations, but by household names.
Employers who deliberately underpay their workers not only deny working and middle class Australians a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work, they also undercut employers who are doing the right thing for their workforce.
It’s a distortion of the market that drags everyone down.
A Shorten Labor Government will stand up for working and middle class families.
Labor will put people first, strengthening and protecting workers’ rights at work by:  Cracking down on the underpayment of workers, with increased penalties for employers who deliberately and systemically avoid paying their employees properly;
Ramping up protections for workers from sham contracting;
Giving the Fair Work Ombudsman the powers and resources to pursue employers who liquidate their companies in order to avoid paying the money they owe their workers
Introducing reforms to ensure that temporary overseas workers are not being exploited and underpaid and that there is a level playing field for all workers in Australia.
Labor’s package of reforms builds on its strong record of protecting wages and conditions and cracking down on worker exploitation.
That is because only Labor understands that fairness at work helps to drive a more productive, competitive and prosperous economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
Protect Weekend Penalty Rates
Labor believes that penalty rates continue to be a fundamental part of a strong safety net for Australian workers, enabling those in low income and highly casualised industries to share in the nation’s economic prosperity.
Labor understands that penalty rates are not a luxury; they are what pays the bills and puts food on the table for the 4.5 million Australians that rely on them.
Penalty rates are not only critical to the individuals and their families who rely on them; if you reduce the take home pay of low-paid workers, you reduce the amount they spend, which will negatively impact the economy as a whole.
Hospitality workers are in the bottom 30 per cent of Australian income earners.
Along with hospitality and food services, retail has the largest proportion of low paid workers in Australia.
Women make up a disproportionate share of workers in both the retail and hospitality sectors accounting for 55 per cent of all those employed.
Labor understands that for these workers weekend penalty rates are not a luxury, they are what pays the bills and puts food on the table.
Labor supports workers' weekend penalty rates and will oppose Mr Turnbull's attempts to cut them.
The election of a Shorten Labor Government election will result in a stark change in the direction of the Australian Government regarding penalty rates.
In Opposition, Labor has already taken the unprecedented step of making a submission to the FWC arguing that penalty rates must not be cut.
Labor’s submission is available here.
Labor in Government will intervene in proceedings to make a further submission to the Fair Work Commission (FWC), in favour of retaining penalty rates.
The Commonwealth Government last made a submission in favour of penalty rates during the two-year review of modern awards – when Labor was in power.
Labor also made changes to the Fair Work Act in 2013 to ensure that the Fair Work Commission took into account the need to provide additional remuneration for employees working outside normal hours, including weekends.
This is in sharp contrast with the Abbott-Turnbull Government which has made it clear penalty rates should be cut, through the Productivity Commission’s report.
The difference between Labor and the Liberals couldn’t be more stark.
At a time when we are facing the slowest wages growth in 25 years, Labor supports workers' penalty rates and will oppose Mr Turnbull's attempts to cut them.
Only Labor will defend workers from attacks on penalty rates.
We will never stop fighting for penalty rates - before and after the decision.
POSITIVE POLICY
Better Union Governance
The Australian union movement has been the driving force behind universal health care, superannuation, the eight hour day and the minimum wage among many other achievements.
Workers have fundamental democratic rights to representation in the workplace, to freedom of association, to collectively bargain, and to organise and be represented by their union.
For these reasons, Labor has zero tolerance for criminality or corruption in the union movement and has consistently argued that any criminal conduct in the union movement must be investigated by police and prosecuted in the Court.
Recent revelations of theft and the flagrant misuse of union members’ money by a small number of union officials requires a tough and effective response.
We must ensure such conduct is detected and acted upon at the earliest opportunity.
As democratic institutions, unions must also be transparent in the conduct of their elections.
Indeed election fundraising must be more transparent across all institutions in the Australian polity.
Labor will introduce a series of reforms to ensure better union governance.
This includes: Labor will provide the General Manager of the Fair Work Commission with an additional $4.5 million over four years to monitor the 109 employer and employee organisations presently registered.
Labor will introduce tougher penalties for union officials who break the law.
Labor will require registered organisations to rotate their auditors every 5 years, consistent with the requirements under the Corporations Act.
Labor will extend current electoral funding laws to donations and expenditure relating to all elections managed by the Australian Electoral Commission – whether they are union elections or the Federal election.
Labor has long advocated for lower disclosure thresholds, and if elected will reduce the current disclosure threshold in the Commonwealth Electoral Act for election funding from $13,000 to $1,000.
POSITIVE POLICY
Protecting Rights At Work: Licensing Labour Hire
A Shorten Labor Government will protect the pay and conditions of vulnerable workers through a national licensing regime for the labour hire industry.
From 1 July 2017, an elected Labor government will make it unlawful for labour hire companies to operate without a licence and for other firms to knowingly or recklessly use an unlicensed labour hire company.
Breaches of these licensing laws will carry a penalty of $216,000 for individuals (1,200 penalty units) and $1.1million (6,000 penalty units) for a body corporate.
Recent examples of wrongdoing by dodgy labour hire companies that engage in unscrupulous practices and rip off workers is tarnishing employers that do the right thing, and is undercutting wages and conditions.
To help oversee the new licensing rules, Labor will establish a Labour Hire Licensing and Compliance Inspectorate within the Office of the Fair Work Ombudsman which will have the power to monitor compliance with the licensing regime, and will also keep a public register of all licensed labour hire companies.
Labor’s reforms build on our strong record of protecting wages and conditions.
Only Labor understands that fairness at work helps to drive a more productive, competitive and prosperous economy.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government has done absolutely nothing to deal with the unscrupulous practices of labour hire companies.
This is yet another area of public policy that Labor is taking the lead on.
Only Labor can be trusted to stand up for the wages and conditions of workers.
Budget repair that’s fair: a 10 year plan to strengthen the Australian economy
The problem with Mr Turnbull is he's soft on multinationals but hard on schools and hospitals.
The budget is a matter of priorities -- and that’s why Labor will level the playing field for first home buyers and make multinationals pay their fair share.
POSITIVE POLICY
Making Multinationals Pay Their Fair Share of Tax
It is not fair that Australians work hard and pay tax while big multinationals get to play by different rules.
The Australian Tax Office has revealed one in four big multinationals pay no tax at all in Australia – not one cent.
It is not fair that Australian businesses are paying more tax in Australia than big multinationals.
Every tax dollar that gets sent offshore is a dollar that can’t be spent on things that matter here at home: like schools, hospitals and roads.
Labor will shut down loopholes which allow big multinational companies to send profits overseas, ensuring they pay their fair share of tax just like everyone else has to.
Our package includes: Changes to the arrangements for how multinational companies claim tax deductions
Greater compliance work by the ATO to track down and tackle corporate tax avoidance
Cracking down on multinational companies using hybrid structures to reduce tax
Improved transparency and data matching.
Labor’s plan has been fully costed by the Parliamentary Budget Office, and will bring at least $7.2 billion back to Australia in tax from big multinationals over the next decade.
Our tax system shouldn’t get softer the higher it goes.
How much tax you pay shouldn’t be decided by how good a lawyer you have.
Labor’s approach has been developed in consultation with multinational tax practitioners, academics, industry and costed by the independent Parliamentary Budget Office.
This approach also draws on the OECD’s global action plans for countering base erosion and profit shifting.
Tightening Australia’s tax net will not be easy – it is a complex and difficult task.
But we need to act decisively to make sure big multinationals start paying their fair share of tax now.
POSITIVE POLICY
Helping Small Business Access Finance
Australia has an unprecedented opportunity to transition from an economy based on resources, primary industries and domestically focused businesses to one based on high-growth, knowledge-intensive businesses that can compete globally.
Currently Australian micro-businesses either struggle to get a loan or may borrow via other means, such as residential mortgages, in the absence of cheaper, more appropriate financing alternatives.
We want to help more Australians convert their great ideas into good businesses.
We will enable entrepreneurs to access the capital they need to start and grow their enterprises without them having to take risks on the family home.
Labor will work with the banks and finance industry to develop StartUp Finance, a partial guarantee scheme which will improve access to finance for Australian micro-businesses.
Under StartUp Finance, Labor will examine partially guaranteeing small loans from banks and finance institutions to give start-ups the affordable capital they need to get going with their business.
Australia is one of the only countries in the developed world without such a scheme in place.
Labor will establish this scheme to back in the creativity and ingenuity of Australians
and grow more good local jobs.
POSITIVE POLICY
Helping Small Businesses Incorporate
More sole traders will see the benefits of incorporating their businesses under Labor’s plan to give small businesses the benefits of incorporation – which lower tax rates and improves liability protection.
Increasingly small businesses are moving towards becoming companies – allowing them to gain the legal protection of limited liability, promote asset protection, retain profits for working capital, succession planning and income distribution.
But currently, small businesses owners, who are often time-poor and face cash-flow challenges, are confronted with a hugely daunting and highly complex system in order to make this happen.
Labor will help small businesses to incorporate without additional red tape. Incorporation helps promote asset protection, retaining profits for working capital, access to CGT discounts, succession planning and income distribution.
Labor will improve Australia’s current complicated and expensive arrangements, with another stream of incorporation, one that provides a single, simplified structure, tailored for small business.
As the Australian economy transitions, the role of our small businesses as drivers of economic growth and prosperity has never been more important.
This is why Labor will work to help ease the burden on small businesses and allow them to grow and prosper.
POSITIVE POLICY
Lowering The Small Business Company Tax Rate
Small businesses make a huge contribution to national prosperity and supporting Australian jobs. Small businesses play a central role in the economy.
Over 2 million businesses – sole traders, partnerships, trusts and small employers – have helped underpin 25 years of economic growth.
Labor stands for helping our small businesses succeed in a competitive global economy.
That’s why Labor has committed to a reduction in the small business company tax rate providing there is bi-partisan support from the coalition and that it is conducted in a fiscally responsible fashion.
Labor supported the cut in the company tax rate for small businesses to 28.5% and will support the further cut to 27.5% proposed in the 2016 Budget.
This will cover small businesses representing 83 per cent of Australian companies.
Billion dollar operations are not small businesses and so Labor will not proceed with the Government’s company tax to 25 per cent and plan to extend the small business threshold to $10 million and beyond.
According to preliminary estimates from the independent Parliamentary Budget Office, this proposal will improve the Budget by $49 billion over the decade.
Labor did not support the Government’s abolition of Labor's original instant asset write-off in the 2014 Budget.
Labor did support its restoration in the 2015 Budget.
POSITIVE POLICY
Research and Development Investment Target
Australians want to know where the new jobs are coming from, what their kids will do for a living and what the jobs of the next generation will be.
Nothing matters more to Labor than securing the jobs of the future: jobs that help Australians aim high, raise families and lift their standard of living.
The new jobs of the future require new skills.
Designing skills, coding skills – building, refining, adapting and servicing the machines and supply chains of a new age.
Three out of every four of the fastest growing occupations in Australia will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
Not just researchers and programmers but technicians, electricians, plumbers and machine mechanics.
Yet right now, in our schools, TAFES and universities, there not enough people are acquiring these skills.
Australia must get smarter – or we will get poorer.
Labor believes Australia can be the science, start-up and technology capital of our region: attracting the best minds, supporting great institutions and encouraging home our great expats.
That is why Bill Shorten has nominated the goal of seeing Australia devote 3 per cent of our GDP to research and development by the end of the next decade.
Labor wants more Australians making breakthroughs and adapting technology here at home.
And more Australian businesses sharing in the benefits of that technology: in our warehouses, in our factories, in our farms and design firms.
Devoting 3 per cent of GDP to research and development will help harness the power of science, technology, engineering and mathematics to prepare for the future.
A future of knowledge and service industries and advanced manufacturing, a nation of ideas and a country that makes things here.
Our future prosperity depends on harnessing Australian ideas and defining a new global market for world-leading products.
POSITIVE POLICY
Backing In Startups and Innovative Companies
Labor believes our potential as a nation comes from the creativity and ingenuity of Australians.
We know our future prosperity depends on harnessing Australian entrepreneurship and defining a new global market for world-leading Australian products.
Australia has an unprecedented opportunity to transition from an economy based on resources, primary industries and domestically focused businesses to one based on high-growth, knowledge-intensive businesses that can compete globally.
A Shorten Labor Government will work hand in hand with banks, the finance industry, venture capital and tens of thousands of Australian entrepreneurs to harness the smarts and skills of our people to drive economic growth and create the jobs of the future.
The recent Startup Economy study undertaken by PwC and commissioned by Google Australia projected that, in the right conditions, high-growth technology companies could contribute 4 per cent of GDP (or $109 billion) and add 540,000 jobs to the Australian economy by 2033 from a base of approximately 0.2 per cent of GDP today.
To support this transition, Labor will create a new $500 million Smart Investment Fund to back-in great Australian ideas and help them compete on the world stage.
The Smart Investment Fund will partner with venture capitalists and licensed fund managers to co-invest in early stage and high potential companies, providing a Commonwealth investment of up to 50 per cent of the start-up capital needed to help Australian companies commercialise their smart ideas and innovations.
The Smart Investment Fund will open two rounds over five years, with the intention of making it a rolling program, to develop an ecosystem for ongoing innovation and jobs.
In addition to providing a co-investment, businesses supported by the Smart Investment Fund will gain access to expert advice in commercialisation and access to international networks.
The Smart Investment Fund will be based on the successful Innovation and Industry Funds, which were created by the Howard Government in 1998 and cut by the Abbott Government in last year’s Budget.
POSITIVE POLICY
Getting Startups Capital - Angel Investment Schemes & Reforming ESVCLPs
Labor will help supercharge the formation of startups in Australia by delivering tax relief for angel investors through a new Australian Angel Investment Scheme and through changes to the existing Early Stage Venture Capital Limited Partnerships.
Australian Angel Investment Scheme
The Australian Angel Investment Scheme, based on the UK SEIS, aims to attract greater private financing support for startups in the early stage of their development.
It will reward individual support for the nation’s early stage innovation effort via modest tax relief to investors who purchase an equity stake in those businesses.
The benefits of targeting significant tax relief to very early stage startups (as opposed to more well established businesses in latter stages of development) is that these they have the most trouble getting access to finance because its where the largest market barriers exist.
Once early stage startups have proven concepts and get on their feet, they are in a better position to then seek out other avenues of finance, such as venture capital and crowd-source funding.
The Australian Angel Investment Scheme will have the following characteristics: An upfront 50 per cent tax deduction for an investment up to a maximum of $200,000 per year
Investors can ‘carry back’ tax relief if they don’t reach the maximum $200,000 cap in any particular year.
Full capital gains tax exemption for equity held in the startup venture for more than three years.
Any realised losses following investment in the scheme can be deducted against wage and salary income.
Deferral of capital gains tax on investments if the investor directs a prior capital gain into a new startup venture.
Startups supported under the scheme would have the following characteristics: Maximum of 25 employees;
Maximum $400,000 in assets; and
Maximum raised under the scheme is $300,000 per year.
Businesses accessing this support must have a permanent presence in Australia and must meet certain rules and eligibility requirements.
Labor will review the program following implementation to ensure it is appropriately calibrated and attracts smart angel investors that can take startup businesses through future stages of development.
Early Stage Venture Capital Limited Partnerships
Venture capital funds of between $10 million and $100 million invested in Australian businesses are entitled to preferential tax treatment through the ESVCLP program.
ESVCLP entitles a fund to flow-through tax treatment and its investors receive a complete tax exemption on their share of the fund's income (both revenue and capital).
Labor will lower the minimum level of investment required for entry into the ESVCLP program from $10 million to $5 million to facilitate increased funding from angel investors.
Labor will also make sensible changes to streamline and update the requirements of the ESVCLP program, including implementing measures that were proposed by Labor in 2013, in response to a Board of Taxation Review, but abandoned by the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Currently the ESVCLP rules restrict any one entity from contributing more than 30 per cent of a fund.
Only financial institutions are exempt from this rule.
To encourage greater participation from investors in other sectors, rules should enable the regulator to provide exemptions for certain widely held companies who demonstrate an active, sizeable commitment to Australian innovation.
Accordingly, a Labor Government will work with relevant regulators and stakeholders to ease ESVCLP contribution restrictions for widely held companies and sophisticated investors.
POSITIVE POLICY
National Information Policy
The explosive growth in digitisation and connectivity in Australia has created an opportunity for a new, economy-wide productivity agenda.
Today, digital data – information - is the fuel for digital innovation and productivity growth across the public, private and community sectors.
Today, the Internet of Things and cheaper telemetry means we now have unprecedented volumes of data.
This data can be aggregated and pooled, helping to maximise benefits for consumers.
Technology consultancy, Gartner estimates that there will be 4.9 billion connected devices in use by the end of 2015 – and 26 billion by 2020.
This data is the fuel of digital innovation and productivity growth across the public, private and community sectors.
That is why it is important the right policy settings to protect consumers, create new business opportunities, promote innovation and lift productivity.
Labor will pursue a new, national reform agenda - National Information Policy - to be pursued through a cross-sector Independent Data Council.
The Independent Data Council would be modelled on the New Zealand ‘Data Futures Partnership’ and the UK ‘Open Data Institute’ and would include experts from government, academia and the private sector.
It would be tasked with promoting an optimal open data culture in Australia supported by appropriate rules and institutions.
A National Information Policy would follow the model of the Keating Government’s National Competition Policy and systematically scan institutions (public, private and community), policies and regulations to identify obstacles to optimal data generation, protection, access and use.
POSITIVE POLICY
Entrepreneur Landing Pads
Labor will back our best and brightest overseas, encouraging Australian entrepreneurs find new markets, sources of finance and develop expertise internationally.
A Shorten Labor Government will boost commercialisation of Australia’s R&D and support Australian entrepreneurs in the United States by setting up more dedicated innovation and commercialisation global ‘landing pads’.
These landing pads will advance Australia’s digital economy and startup sector by: providing a home base for newly arrived Australian startups seeking to enter the US market;
introducing Australian entrepreneurs to venture/risk capital firms;
supporting links between American research institutions, companies and their Australian counterparts;
And showcasing technologies developed by research agencies such as CSIRO and by Cooperative Research Centres to investors to develop a commercialisation pipeline.
This proposal has been recommended by StartupAus and is based on the Kiwi Landing Pad, a successful initiative supporting New Zealand entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley.
The Innovate Australia Landing Pad will complement and build on the previous Labor Government’s investment in the Advance Innovation Program.
With support from corporate sponsors, Australian global talent network, Advance, has since transformed this initiative creating elevate61 which is “designed to enable high performing Australian businesses to fast track their growth into the United States and beyond”.
The Landing Pads will be supported by the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science’s international counsellors network, in collaboration with CSIRO, Austrade and other relevant Australian agencies and non-government organisations.
Innovate Australia will also oversee a similar initiative to support our entrepreneurs and startups to engage in Asian economies, particularly those with mature capital markets, such as Singapore.
POSITIVE POLICY
Greater Budget Transparency
The Abbott-Turnbull Liberals have trashed the principles of budget honesty and transparency during their first term in office.
From the misleading figures included in their first Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook to the politicisation of the most recent Intergenerational Report, this government has shown it is time for Australia to put in place new rules to ensure greater transparency and independence in our national budgeting.
Labor will give the independent Parliamentary Budget Office an enhanced role in Australia’s macroeconomic reporting to promote stronger fiscal discipline and enhance transparency around Commonwealth Budgets.
Under Labor, an enhanced Parliamentary Budget Office will: prepare the macroeconomic forecasts that underpin all key Budget statements and updates;
prepare and publish the Intergenerational Report every five years;
prepare and publish an annual structural budget balance statement.
The Australian people and financial markets should be able to trust the integrity of the way budgets are put together.
Unfortunately, the Abbott-Turnbull Government has shown that nothing is sacred when it comes to rewriting political history at the expense of confidence and trust in economic and fiscal decision-making.
The Charter of Budget Honestly served us well up until the last federal election.
But it is now time to strengthen it in line with other fiscal authorities around the world.
Delegating further responsibilities to the independent PBO will strengthen Australia’s budget frameworks that currently underpin our AAA credit rating from all three major ratings agencies, achieved for the first time under Labor.
The vast majority of independent fiscal councils overseas evaluate the long-term sustainability of the government’s finances – transferring responsibility for the Intergenerational Report to the PBO moves Australia in line with other countries.
Annual structural budget balance statements each and every year will also help avoid the misstep of the previous Coalition Government which, despite running headline surpluses, drove the budget into structural deficit towards the end of its tenure – doing so at a time when the economy was already running at full capacity.
Labor will ensure the enhanced PBO has the resources it needs to undertake these three new roles and we will work to see these reforms implemented within 12 months of Labor taking office.
Improving outreach
In addition to enhancing the PBO, a Shorten Labor Government will open an Australian Treasury outreach office in Perth to develop closer links with Australian businesses and boost engagement with the nations in our region.
This is critical for a better understanding of the Australian economy as well as the challenges confronting different sectors, including the Western Australian economy.
The Australian Treasury has some of the best and brightest minds and will benefit from being ‘on the ground’, working more closely with some of Australia’s biggest and most important companies, including resource, agriculture and service-oriented businesses.
The office will have a dedicated number of Treasury staff and will be located in the Perth central business district.
POSITIVE POLICY
Challenge Incentives for SMEs
Government purchasing decisions are too often steered towards acquiring well established products and services.
Conservative decision-making prevents Commonwealth agencies from engaging effectively with startups and SMEs.
This means that new technologies and the offerings of Australia’s innovative SMEs are often bypassed.
But with Commonwealth Government procurement worth over $48 billion per year, we should be encouraging departments and agencies to better engage with SMEs and startups, to drive innovation and help Australian entrepreneurs prove the value of their ideas.
Labor will trial an ‘AusGov Challenge Platform’ to engage all Australians in the challenges that face Government.
Similar to challenge.gov in the US, this platform will provide a single portal for government agencies to submit challenges for the public to respond to.
The trial will initially engage a group of ten to twelve agencies that are seeking to identify new approaches to utilising data, technology and analytics to solve their policy and management challenges.
These projects – essentially competitions – will be managed through a centralised online platform, with agencies setting reward funding or prizes on the basis of the expected return to government from solving the problem.
In the United States, for example, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is offering $10,000 in prizes for the creation of a system to automate the identification of endangered right whales using a dataset of aerial photographs.
At the other end of the spectrum, the Department of Veterans’ Affairs is offering $300,000 in prizes to create algorithms for identifying redundancies, gaps, conflicts and interactions among care-plan items and other data.
Labor will commit $5 million to establish the online challenge platform and build capacity in agencies that choose to participate in the trial.
If successful, the platform will be expanded and the procurement rules and processes amended to enable the challenge platform to grow and adapt as agencies develop new, more complex challenges.
POSITIVE POLICY
Sharing Economy
The sharing economy is changing how Australians buy and sell goods and services.
At the same time, it is changing how we think about work and the dividing line between our private goods and public assets.
Labor wants to see all Australians share the benefits of the sharing economy.
We also want to get the rules right to protect workers, consumers and the community.
Labor’s work on the sharing economy is part of our plan to build a more innovative and entrepreneurial Australia.
We are stepping up to the new challenges and opportunities of the digital economy.
Our principle’s on the sharing company comprise: Primary property is yours to share
New services must support good wages and working conditions
Everyone must pay their fair share of tax
Proper protection for public safety
Access for all
Playing by the rules
A Shorten Labor Government will work with state and territory governments to deliver legislative and regulatory reforms which turn Labor’s five sharing economy principles into concrete laws.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and the Productivity Commission will be tasked with monitoring developments to determine how well this new regulatory approach is working and the impact on existing markets.
POSITIVE POLICY
Keeping Super Fair
Labor is committed to ensuring the sustainability of the retirement income system in a way that delivers fairness and enables Australians to maintain a comfortable standard of living in retirement.
Tax concessions are an important part of the superannuation system, as they encourage people to contribute funding and preserve these savings until their own retirement.
But these tax concessions benefit high income earners more than other Australians and over time will place an increasing burden on the Budget.
This is unsustainable and unfair.
The Government’s own Financial System Inquiry found that 10 per cent of Australians receive 38 per cent of Australia’s super tax concessions, more than the combined benefit of the bottom 70 per cent of Australians.
Labor’s plan is to put the retirement income system on a sustainable footing by targeting superannuation tax concessions to those that need them the most.
We will:
1. Reform the tax exemption for earnings on superannuation balances that exceed $1.5 million
The tax-free status of all superannuation earnings is disproportionally beneficial to high income earners and is unsustainable.
Labor will better target the tax concession for earnings on superannuation assets supporting retirement income streams.
This measure will only apply to those in retirement.
The proposed measure would reduce the tax-free concession available to people with annual superannuation incomes from earnings of more than $75,000.
From 1 July 2017, future earnings on assets supporting income streams will be taxfree up to $75,000 a year for each individual.
Earnings above the $75,000 threshold will attract the same concessional rate of 15 per cent that applies to earnings in the accumulation phase.
This measure will affect approximately 60,000 superannuation account holders with superannuation balances in excess of $1.5 million.
2. Reduce the Higher Income Superannuation Charge (HISC) threshold from $300,000 to $250,000
Current superannuation tax concessions provide greater benefit to people on high-incomes than people on average incomes.
For instance, someone on $250,000 currently receives a concession of 30 per cent from their top marginal tax rate on superannuation contributions, while someone on $35,000 currently receives a concession of only 4 per cent from their top marginal tax rate.
We will improve this measure by lowering the HISC threshold to $250,000.
Around 110,000 people will be affected by the new arrangements.
This would more closely align the concessions receive by those on middle incomes with those on very high incomes, so that tax relief for superannuation contributions are distributed more fairly and sustainably.
Together, these measures will save $14.3 billion over the decade, allowing Labor to invest in other important areas like schools, hospitals and keeping the pension strong.
POSITIVE POLICY
Entrepreneur Visas
The UK, Singapore, New Zealand, Ireland and a number of other countries have all created specific visa policies to attract a growing pool of early-stage entrepreneurs.
Labor will introduce two new visa categories that will help attract the best global entrepreneurial talent to help build Australia’s growing startup ecosystem.
Startup Entrepreneurial Visa
The Startup Entrepreneurial Visa will be provided annually to 2,000 global entrepreneurs looking to establish themselves in Australia;
This visa will be provided to applicants with proven access to capital [in the order of around $200,000] that they will invest in a startup venture in Australia (though less if funding has been provided by a venture capital firm registered with the Australian Private Equity and Venture Capital Association Limited or by startup accelerators and incubators);
This visa category will run for a maximum of 3 years, though visas may be extended for another year or converted to permanent residence after 2 years if all eligibility requirements are met.
Graduate Startup Entrepreneurial Visa
This new visa will be provided annually to 2,000 university graduates who have a credible and genuine startup business idea.
Graduates will be allowed to stay in Australia for 1 year to establish a startup business after graduation.
Graduates can apply to extend this visa for a second year provided they have a new endorsement letter from their higher education institution confirming they have made satisfactory progress in developing their business.
There will be no upfront funding requirement for this visa, though graduates will require endorsement from a participating higher education institution.
POSITIVE POLICY
Innovation Investment Partnership
Historically, Labor has been well placed in bringing together groups to work as one for the national economic interest – a major economic priority right now must be opening up pathways to encourage stronger investment flows towards innovation activity in this country.
Labor will establish an Innovation Investment Partnership, bringing together venture capital, superannuation fund and startup stakeholders – designed to identify and overcome barriers to investment in Australian-based VC funds.
It will also explore opportunities to develop mechanisms that encourage the superannuation sector to invest in and support Australian venture capital, as occurs in almost every other developed economy in the world.
Building the linkages between VCs and super funds will provide an added longer term benefit for startups – sharpening up their commercial and business acumen through the process of seeking funding support.
POSITIVE POLICY
No Increase to the GST
A 15 per cent GST on everything will make families pay more for what they need the most.
Malcolm Turnbull says he doesn’t want to increase the GST to 15% on everything, but make no mistake after the election Malcolm Turnbull will try and increase the GST.
On the GST just like on marriage equality and climate change, Malcolm Turnbull says one thing but he does another.
Malcolm Turnbull is committed to increasing the GST.
The Liberals can’t be trusted on the GST, after all John Howard said we would ‘never ever’ have a GST, and then after he had won an election he set about introducing a GST.
Labor knows that increasing the GST just doesn’t make sense: NATSEM and Parliamentary Budget Office modelling shows an increase in the GST would see those least able to afford it pay the biggest share of their incomes in GST.
Labor wants to talk about tax reform in the areas of ensuring multinational companies pay their fair share, and making our superannuation system fairer.
But increasing the GST? It will increase the cost of everything and it’s just not fair.
POSITIVE POLICY
Positive Plan on Housing Affordability - Negative Gearing Reform
For most young families in Australia, the dream of purchasing and owning their own home is almost completely out of reach.
Working and middle class families are increasingly being priced out of the housing market.
Ownership rates for young people aged 25-34 have spiralled downwards in recent years from 60% to 48%.
Young people are being forced to take on levels of debt unimaginable just a few decades ago.
With first home buyers making up just 1 out of 7 of all home purchases, we have to do better.
It’s well and truly time someone did something about making housing more affordable in Australia.
That’s why Labor has announced a policy that will help level the playing field for first home buyers competing with investors.
Labor will reform negative gearing effective from 1 July 2017, a policy which will help put the Australian dream of home ownership back within the reach of middle and working class families.
Australia aspires to be a fair society and we expect our tax system to align with this aspiration.
For most Australians this is the case – their tax is withheld fortnightly on the basis of their wages.
The more an employee earns, the greater the amount of tax they pay.
This simple principle of progressive tax scales is a fundamental pillar of our tax system,  and ensures that the burden of tax falls on those most able to bear it.
While this principle applies to fortnightly pay cheques, it does not apply to other aspects of the tax system.
Significant tax subsidies are available for people that hold investments, establishing a significantly more favourable tax basis for holding capital, rather than earning income.
Higher income Australians are able to use these tax subsidies to reduce the income tax they pay, primarily through negatively gearing property.
Ultimately, a dollar of tax avoided by high income Australians is an extra dollar of tax paid by all other Australians.
Labor is committed to ensuring that the tax system is fair for all Australians.
Labor will reform negative gearing to ensure that our tax system is fair, sustainable and targets jobs and growth.
Negative gearing refers to the situation where investors make an investment (mostly in property) that loses money in the short term (e.g. loan and related costs are greater than rental income), in the expectation of making capital gains in the future.
The investor can deduct any losses associated with the investment from their salary and wage income.
Labor will limit negative gearing to new housing from 1 July 2017.
All investments made before this date will not be affected by this change and will be fully grandfathered.
This will mean that taxpayers will continue to be able to deduct net rental losses against their wage income, providing the losses come from newly constructed housing.
From 1 July 2017 losses from new investments in shares and existing properties can still be used to offset investment income tax liabilities.
These losses can also continue to be carried forward to offset the final capital gain on the investment.
POSITIVE POLICY
Positive Plan on Housing Affordability - Capital Gains Tax Reform
For most young families in Australia, the dream of purchasing and owning their own home is almost completely out of reach.
Working and middle class families are increasingly being priced out of the housing market.
Ownership rates for young people aged 25-34 have spiralled downwards in recent years from 60% to 48%.
Young people are being forced to take on levels of debt unimaginable just a few decades ago.
With first home buyers making up just 1 out of 7 of all home purchases, we have to do better.
It’s well and truly time someone did something about making housing more affordable in Australia.
That’s why Labor has announced a policy that will help level the playing field for first home buyers competing with investors.
Labor will reform the capital tax discount effective from 1 July 2017, a policy which will help put the Australian dream of home ownership back within the reach of middle and working class families.
Australia aspires to be a fair society and we expect our tax system to align with this aspiration.
Ultimately, a dollar of tax avoided by high income Australians is an extra dollar of tax paid by all other Australians.
Labor is committed to ensuring that the tax system is fair for all Australians.
Labor will halve the capital gains discount for all assets purchased after 1 July 2017. This will reduce the capital gains tax discount for assets that are held longer than 12 months from the current 50 per cent to 25 per cent.
All investments made before this date will not be affected by this change and will be fully grandfathered.
This policy change will also not affect investments made by superannuation funds.
The CGT discount will not change for small business assets.
This will ensure that no small businesses are worse off under these changes.
Labor will consult with industry, relevant stakeholders and State governments on further design and implementation details ahead of the start date for both these proposals.
POSITIVE POLICY
Comprehensive Credit Reporting
In Australia, the traditional form of financing a new small business, using personal housing as collateral, is becoming more and more difficult for young people with a new idea.
This is why Labor wants to make it easier for potential new small business owners to access to finance and promote competition in small business lending.
We already know how important information is when making investment decisions.
Comprehensive Credit Reporting is about sharing positive client information to allow financial lenders to make better decisions.
Allowing more lenders to access positive information about clients, such as good repayment histories on credit cards and regular contributions to savings accounts, will promote competition for small business financing in the banking sector.
This is good for consumers, good for small business and good for banks.
David Murray noted “personal credit history is a major factor in credit providers’ decisions to lend to consumers, but also to new business ventures and smaller firms”.
Historically, Australian banks have shared negative credit information.
Yet we lag the world when it comes to sharing positive information.
This inhibits competition and reduces the potential number of successful loan applications.
Other OECD countries like Japan and New Zealand have pushed ahead with positive credit reporting.
Importantly, while supporting consumers and potential new small businesses, positive credit reporting also has a benign economic impact.
An ACIL Tasman study found a one-off improvement in capital productivity of 0.1 per cent, worth up to $5.3 billion over a decade.
International studies also show a decline in the default rate of loan applications.
David Murray recommended a formal review into Comprehensive Credit Reporting and Labor will undertake that review.
If the review finds the industry code isn’t up to scratch, we will introduce mandatory reporting to share positive credit information amongst lenders.
The message is clear.
If you want to start a business, you can and a Shorten Labor Government will help you.
If you already own a small business, a Shorten Labor Government will support you.
POSITIVE POLICY
Multinational Tax Transparency
Labor will continue to shine light on the dark corners of multinational tax.
Making multinationals pay their fair share has always been a Labor agenda.
In government, we closed loopholes and improved transparency, over the repeated objections of the Liberals.
From Opposition, we have led the debate, releasing strong policies to reduce excessive debt-loading and properly resource the tax office.
The Government is still welcome to adopt our $7.2 billion package.
If elected to Government, Labor will introduce an additional comprehensive suite of new measures to increase transparency on the tax affairs of multinational corporations.
In Government, Labor will: Increase penalties for non-compliance with country-by-country reporting:
It is simply wrong that the current penalty for failing to file country-by-country reports is a mere $5400 – less than you get for streaking across the SCG.
Labor will increase that penalty 50 times.
Should a company continue non-compliance after the maximum fine is reached, the Commissioner of Taxation is empowered to conduct a broad review of the company’s tax affairs.
Restore the $100 million threshold for reporting the tax affairs of large private firms bringing them back in line with public companies:
Labor’s original threshold was watered-down in a dirty deal between the Coalition and the Greens last year, with 600 companies being shielded from public scrutiny as a result.
Obligation to disclose the beneficial ownership for Australian legal identities:
Labor will ensure that the G20 principles Australia committed to at the G20 summit in Brisbane in 2014, which are based on guidance from the Financial Action Task Force, are implemented fully and quickly to ensure that Australia cannot be used as a destination for money-laundering, tax evasion, terrorism financing or other criminal behaviour.
This will be achieved by establishing a publicly accessible central registry of the beneficial ownership of companies, trusts and other corporate structures.
The Coalition – which voted against every multinational tax avoidance reform Labor introduced in government - refuses to take this issue seriously.
The occasional measures they announce are ad hoc and only in response to the pressure applied by Labor and public outcry.
The government’s refusal to ensure companies and individuals pay their fair share of tax demonstrates once again that it has forgotten small business and ordinary people.
When large corporations and wealthy individuals use loopholes in our tax laws and secret tax havens to avoid paying their fair share of tax in Australia, all Australians suffer through higher taxes or poorer government infrastructure and services.
As Australia’s Tax Commissioner Chris Jordan told the Senate Estimates Committee “(O)ur Australian tax system is under fire from the actions of multinationals and large companies seeking to abuse it.”
Now Australians know that if you want a party that gets tough on multinationals, vote Labor.
If you want a party that gets tough on Medicare, vote Liberal.
POSITIVE POLICY
Protecting Paid Parental Leave
A Shorten Labor Government will put people first by reversing Malcolm Turnbull’s unfair cuts to paid parental leave.
Under Labor’s policy, each year 80,000 families with new babies will be as much as $11,800 better off than they would be under the Liberals.
By contrast, if Malcolm Turnbull is re-elected, new mums will be forced to choose between returning to work early and missing out on time with their newborn, or staying at home and having their living standards drastically reduced.
Last year on Mother’s Day – the Liberal Government announced huge cuts to Labor’s paid parental leave scheme.
Senior Liberal Ministers disgracefully labelled hardworking mothers double-dippers, rorters and fraudsters.
Malcolm Turnbull locked in these cuts to paid parental leave in his Budget.
These cuts are scheduled to begin after the election.
If Labor is elected, we will immediately end the Liberals’ war on working mums.
We will protect their paid parental leave entitlements and their living standards.
The choice for families is clear this election: Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberals will cut paid parental leave, cut family payments and cut penalty rates, all while giving tax cuts to millionaires and multinationals.
Labor will put people first.
We will protect paid parental leave for young families.
In 2011, Labor delivered Australia’s first national paid parental leave scheme.
Since then, more than 730,000 families have been given extra support to spend more time at home in the critical early months of their child’s life.
Labor’s paid parental leave scheme gives eligible new parents 18 weeks’ pay at the National Minimum Wage.
This is a modest and affordable scheme that appropriately targets assistance to women on low and middle incomes.
About 75 per cent of parents receiving Labor’s paid parental leave scheme are on incomes of between $10,000 and $70,000 a year.
Malcolm Turnbull’s election promise to cut paid parental leave shows how out of touch he is with middle and working class families.
He is promising to cut support for hardworking families at the same time as promising a new $1000 baby bonus which the country can’t afford.
Before the last election, the Liberals promised an unfair and unaffordable paid parental leave scheme that would have given $75,000 to wealthy people.
After breaking their promise, the Liberals are now promising to cut thousands of dollars from the household budgets of young families.
Only Labor can be trusted to deliver a fair paid parental leave scheme.
POSITIVE POLICY
Innovate Australia – Stronger Innovation Support.
Labor understands that creating the jobs of the future depends on the strength of our national innovation system.
Innovation is the key to Australia’s future prosperity.
Most of the jobs of the future will be with companies that do not exist today or in industries that have changed dramatically to keep pace with rapid advances in technology.
A Shorten Labor Government will establish a new independent agency called Innovate Australia charged with accelerating economic growth, delivering critical innovation programs and providing expert advice to governments.
Innovate Australia will be modelled on the highly successful innovation agency in the UK, Innovate UK. Innovate Australia will be a new independent agency.
It will be responsible for the administration and delivery of new innovation initiatives, along with existing programs.
POSITIVE POLICY
Fair Income Taxes For Budget Repair That’s Fair
Labor takes the challenge of fair Budget reform seriously.
For Labor, this means being able to demonstrate how we will pay for our policy commitments in a responsible and sustainable manner.
It means making tough decisions, prioritising important social and economic investments in schools, hospitals and infrastructure, while providing fair Budget reform.
Labor will not give individuals earning over $180,000 a tax cut to their marginal tax rate like the Liberals.
The top 3 per cent of income earners should not be receiving a tax cut from 1 July 2017 if the bottom 75 per cent won’t.
According to preliminary estimates from the independent Parliamentary Budget Office this decision will improve the Budget by $16 billion over the decade.
Labor has been leading the debate on tax reform and savings over the last few years, outlining fully costed and funded plans.
We will not repeat the mistake of the Turnbull-Abbott Government of promising a magic pudding and delivering a Budget of broken promises and cuts.
POSITIVE POLICY
Cutting Government Waste: Stop Paying Polluters Not to Pollute
Labor has a clear fiscal plan to get the budget back onto a sustainable footing by delivering more savings than spending over the coming decade.
We have clearly identified a range of Abbott-Turnbull Government policies which do not meet our test for the national interest and will be discontinued under Labor.
For example, the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s emissions policies put Australia at the back of the global pack, and yet we have the highest emissions per person in the developed world.
To date, the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s only response to climate change has been to give billions of dollars to big polluters under Direct Action, run ridiculous scare campaigns and try to destroy the renewable energy industry.
Direct Action is a waste of money built on one counter-productive idea: giving great wads of taxpayer cash to big polluters to keep polluting.
Analysis from Reputex indicates that under this policy, emissions will actually rise by 20 per cent over the next decade.
We can’t afford to waste taxpayers’ money on a plan that won’t work.
A Shorten Labor Government will put a strong commitment to renewable energy at the centre of Australia’s response to climate change.
Renewable energy will deliver new investment, good jobs, lower power bill for homes and small businesses and it will help cut pollution.
If elected, Labor will scrap the Abbott Government’s expensive and ineffective Emissions Reduction Fund.
We will honour contracts that the Government has entered into, but the waste ends there.
Abolishing the Emissions Reduction Fund represents savings of over $1 billion.
These savings, in concert with Labor’s fair plans on multinational taxation, high end superannuation, negative gearing and tobacco excise will help set the budget on a more sustainable trajectory so that Australia can afford to make important investments in the things that matter: like schools, hospitals and infrastructure for our future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Cutting Government Waste: No Plebiscite For Marriage Equality
Labor has a clear fiscal plan to get the budget back onto a sustainable footing by delivering more savings than spending over the coming decade.
We have clearly identified a range of Abbott-Turnbull Government policies which do not meet our test for the national interest and will be discontinued under Labor.
Labor has been clear that we will not proceed with Malcolm Turnbull’s wasteful $160 million plebiscite on marriage equality.
This national vote is completely unnecessary when the Australian Parliament could deal with marriage equality straight away.
Not only that, but the harm done to gay and lesbian Australians and their families through a divisive and hurtful public campaign against marriage equality would cost our community dearly.
These savings, in concert with Labor’s fair plans on multinational taxation, high end superannuation, negative gearing and tobacco excise will help set the budget on a more sustainable trajectory so that Australia can afford to make important investments in the things that matter: like schools, hospitals and infrastructure for our future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Cutting Government Waste: Not Proceeding With The New Baby Bonus
Labor has a clear fiscal plan to get the budget back onto a sustainable footing by delivering more savings than spending over the coming decade.
We have clearly identified a range of Abbott-Turnbull Government policies which do not meet our test for the national interest and will be discontinued under Labor.
Labor will also oppose Malcolm Turnbull’s $1,000 Baby Bonus payment for families with a child under one, saving the Budget $380 million.
This new payment is not about helping Australian families; it was all about Malcolm Turnbull buying support from the National Party to get the top job as Prime Minister.
Australians shouldn’t have to pay the price for this Liberal/National deal.
These savings, in concert with Labor’s fair plans on multinational taxation, high end superannuation, negative gearing and tobacco excise will help set the budget on a more sustainable trajectory so that Australia can afford to make important investments in the things that matter: like schools, hospitals and infrastructure for our future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor’s Budget Repair Strategy
Labor’s Budget strategy will successfully repair the budget without smashing family budgets.
Our budget strategy is framed by our 10-year economic plan that is focused on six key priorities to build a stronger, fairer economy that will support the economic transition today while driving productivity and living standards into the future.
Investing in people – Labor will improve the quality of education and training, to drive productivity and ensure Australians are prepared for the jobs of the future.
Building Australia – Labor will facilitate the economic transition by investing in roads, rail and the NBN, creating jobs and improving the liveability and productivity of our cities and regions.
Driving investment in renewables and new industry – Labor will stand up for jobs in manufacturing and send the right signals to attract investment in renewables.
Supporting innovation and startups – Labor will drive jobs and innovation through tax relief and support for startups.
Helping small business – Labor will deliver tax cuts to small businesses while putting them on a more even playing field when it comes to competing in the marketplace.
Budget repair that's fair – Labor will better target tax concessions to middle and working class families and ensure greater female participation in the workforce.
These investments are vital to future growth in our economy, and to boost wages and living standards.
They also underpin future budget revenue, and a sustainable fiscal position.
Labor has been outlining our 10-year economic plan from opposition.
Throughout, we have been announcing responsible and calibrated budget repair measures to fund our investments and improve the budget position.
We have a clear plan for economic growth, and a clear plan to pay for it.
Labor will take the hard choices in the national interest
We know that funding our priorities requires difficult choices.
Our top priorities are better schools,
protecting Medicare
and investing in job-creating infrastructure –
and we are prepared to make difficult budget decisions to ensure we can fully fund our priorities.
Under our plan for budget repair, we will reduce the deficit every year and return the budget to balance the same year as the Liberals.
Labor will not announce a policy that cannot be funded.
We can afford our policies because: We are supporting responsible savings measures;
We are proposing our own savings measures;
and We are opposing the Liberals’ irresponsible new spending.
These are difficult decisions, but the right decisions, and they offer a clear choice for people at this election.
Budget improvements
Following the release of the independent PEFO and consistent with our practice of updating our proposals to reflect the latest Budget forecasts and parameters based on advice from the independent Parliamentary Budget Office, Labor is releasing an updated package of budget improvements.
From Opposition, Labor has taken difficult decisions to announce $122.3 billion in budget improvements.
This includes measures to better target negative gearing, and ensure big multinationals pay their fair share of tax.
To present the most accurate account of Labor’s budget improvements, we are no longer including proposals where Labor has led the policy debate, and which have most recently been adopted by the Government, such as changes to the tobacco excise and generous superannuation tax concessions for high income earners.
Labor is building on the savings we have already announced with a further $6.1 billion of improvements to the budget over the medium term.
Labor will also resolve several unlegislated measures that remain stuck in the Parliament.
These unfair measures have been rejected by the Parliament and the Australian people and yet remain in the Government’s budget, destroying the credibility of their bottom line.
With the Budget now in a much worse state than it was in 2014, Labor is taking difficult decisions to not reverse some measures.
Resolving the Government’s budget mess will have a budget impact of $5.5 billion over the forward estimates, and $23 billion over medium term.
After fixing the Government’s budget mess, new savings and the latest updates on Labor’s previously announced budget improvements, the total budget improvements proposed by Labor amount to $105.4 billion over the decade.
POSITIVE POLICY
CSIRO – Future Smart Science
A Shorten Labor Government will restore CSIRO’s capacity to drive the national science, research and innovation agenda that will grow new industries and build a smarter Australia.
The Liberals ripped $115 million out of CSIRO in the horror 2014 Budget. One in five CSIRO scientists lost their jobs as a result.
Labor knows Australia cannot be an innovation nation while ripping the heart out of CSIRO.
We will act to end the uncertainty and restore funding and confidence to this great Australian institution.
After more than two years, it is clear that the hallmarks of the Liberals’ innovation agenda are cuts to funding, cuts to scientific infrastructure, cuts to science jobs and the largest brain drain in Australia’s history.
In contrast, Labor has a strong plan for science and innovation, which will help build the industries of the future and create more jobs.
Only Labor can be trusted to restore CSIRO to its place as a world leader in public good research that makes Australia smarter and fairer.
POSITIVE POLICY
Tasmanian Tourism Jobs
A Shorten Labor Government will boost the Tasmanian tourism industry by providing the funding necessary to develop key attractions, delivering jobs and economic benefits for decades to come.
Tasmania is an increasingly popular destination for international tourists, and was declared the number four destination on Lonely Planet’s Best in Travel 2015.
Tourism directly and indirectly supports around 38,000 jobs in Tasmania or about 16.2 per cent of total Tasmanian employment — the highest in the country.
Just this week, figures released by Tourism Research Australia saw a 9 per cent increase in overseas arrivals over the year to March 2016, with a record spend of $349 million.
But without top-class attractions, Tasmania will not be able to retain that growth and capture the full benefits that come with it.
This is particularly vital for the Tasmanian economy as it goes through a period of transition.
A Shorten Labor Government will create a new $44 million Tasmania Tourism Infrastructure Fund to support the tourism industry and build the attractions that will entice tourists and create local jobs.
Opposition Leader Bill Shorten will announce today the first four grants that would be made from the fund under a Shorten Labor Government.
They are: $1.275 million towards completion of the Burnie Waterfront Masterplan through development of a coastal promenade and shared pathway.
$4 million for the final stage of the Three Capes Walk.
$10 million to transform ex-HMAS Tobruk into a dive wreck off Tasmania's north-east coast. Tasmania is the only state without a modern naval vessel dive site.
$15 million for an upgrade to amenities on Cradle Mountain.
The remaining $13.725 million funding will be subject to further announcements.
Labor will stand up for Tasmanian jobs and ensure the Apple Isle has all it needs for a prosperous and fair economy.
POSITIVE POLICY
Northern Australia: A Tourism Powerhouse
A Shorten Labor Government will help northern Australia build the tourism infrastructure it needs to harness the huge economic potential of the Asian tourism boom, creating jobs and driving growth in our regions for decades to come.
Tourism is one of the biggest employers in northern Australia and is growing.
But the lack of high-quality facilities will limit Australia’s ability to capture and grow our share of the booming Asian travel market unless we invest today.
By 2030 there will be over three billion people in the Asian middle classes seeking international tourism opportunities in our region and beyond.
We want them to choose Australia.
Labor will allocate $1 billion from the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility to a Northern Australia Tourism Infrastructure Fund, to boost partnerships with the tourism sector and provide incentives for investment in new and upgraded tourism infrastructure across the north.
The following will be eligible for funding: Projects targeting the expanding Asian tourism market.
Projects promoting Australia’s natural environment such as the Great Barrier Reef.
Eco-tourism.
Indigenous tourism ventures.
Event-based facilities including stadia and convention centres.
Transport and access upgrades, including for ports and airports.
Funding will take the form of concessional loans and other forms of project finance, with successful projects required to pass through rigorous selection processes.
Projects will be encouraged to attract private financing in addition to grants.
Finance will be available to projects in northern Australia.
Labor will resource a renewed Department of Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to administer the Fund.
This will be a competitive process, with clear qualifying and evaluation criteria that will be the subject of prior consultation with the sector.
Because this money will be resourced from the existing Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility, there will be no net impact on the Budget.
The money will remain dedicated to the development of the north.
The Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund was announced over a year ago by Tony Abbott, and precisely nothing has happened since.
The legislation was rushed through the Parliament in its last sitting week this year, and no new projects have been announced.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government has also cut Tourism Australia funding in real terms, abolished the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ Survey of Tourist Accommodation and cancelled Australia’s membership of the United Nations World Tourism Organisation and presence at trade shows.
Labor has a proud record of investment in tourism in the north, including the Townsville V8 Supercar Event Precinct, Karratha Leisure Centre and Magnetic Island Walkway in Townsville.
The former Labor Government provided matched capital investment in tourism through the T-QUAL program to 283 projects between 2011 and 2013.
Australians can’t trust the Liberals and Nationals to invest in tourism in our north.
Only Labor will deliver the investment northern Australia needs to capture the amazing potential of the coming tourist boom and deliver secure Australian jobs for the future.
POSITIVE POLICY
Reforming Competition Policy for Fairer Markets
Unequal market power and increased market concentration have contributed to increasing income and wealth inequality in Australia.
Competition policy reform is a cost effective approach to addressing inequality and preventing unconscionable conduct.
There have been a number of deplorable contraventions of consumer rights targeting the most vulnerable members of our community in recent years, including predatory consumer leasing agreements, breaches of product safety standards, scams and misleading advertising.
In criminal law, conduct targeting or disproportionately impacted disadvantaged Australians is considered an “aggravating factor” in determining penalties.
This is not currently the case in competition law, although authorities can prioritise their investigations to address particularly egregious cases of unconscionable conduct.
What is Labor’s proposal? How will it drive growth or improve fairness?
Labor’s policy is focussed on competition reforms that explicitly address inequality and disadvantage and reinforce our commitment to a more equal society.
Labor is proposing to:  Amend section 76 of the Competition and Consumer Act to allow a court to apply higher penalties for conduct that targets or disproportionately impacts disadvantaged Australians, or apply lower penalties when firms have provided adequate compensation to those affected.
Include a requirement in the Competition and Consumer Act that the ACCC prioritise investigation of conduct that targets or disproportionately impacts disadvantaged Australians.
Investigate the negative impact of increased market concentration on income inequality in Australia.
Encourage the States and Territories to include competition principles in planning and zoning legislation, as recommended by the Harper Review, with a specific focus on shortfalls of appropriately zoned land for key services in disadvantaged communities.
How will it work?
Amending the Competition and Consumer Act (CCA) will allow courts to hand down harsher penalties to businesses that exploit vulnerable groups in our community, and will explicitly direct the ACCC to investigate breaches of competition and consumer law that target disadvantaged Australians.
Labor proposes amending section 76 of the CCA to require a court to consider whether the contravening conduct targets or disproportionately impacts disadvantaged groups when determining financial penalties.
A court would also be required to consider whether the company concerned has sought to compensate those affected by the conduct, providing an incentive for companies to be proactive in providing compensation to affected consumers.
As a complementary reform, we are proposing a new provision be added to Part VII of the CCA requiring the ACCC to prioritise investigations of alleged conduct that targets or disproportionately impacts disadvantaged Australians.
The combination of the two amendments would see the number of cases with inequality implications – and the magnitude of fines – increase.
This would also have a deterrent effect beyond the specific cases that are taken to court.
A Shorten Labor Government would investigate the impacts of increased market concentration on income inequality in Australia and produce policy recommendations on how these effects could be mitigated.
As recommended by the Harper Review, state and territory governments should be encouraged to amend planning and zoning regulations to ensure they promote competition and do not act to limit entry into a market.
There should be a particular focus on shortfalls of appropriately zoned land for key services in disadvantaged communities.
Labor’s record
Labor believes in tackling inequality.
Australians can trust Labor to get it right when it comes to competition and consumer protection.
They can trust us to make sure markets and competition are fair and equitable.
Labor is the party of the Trade Practices Act, National Competition Policy, the Australian Consumer Law and the criminalisation of cartels.
Labor’s proud history of promoting social and economic equality includes needs-based school funding, Medicare, HECS, the Sex Discrimination Act, the Racial Discrimination Act and the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
POSITIVE POLICY
New Jobs Tax Cut
Under Labor’s New Jobs Tax Cut, small businesses will be able to claim a tax deduction of up to $20,000 per worker to offset the wages of up to five new employees.
Just like the previous Labor Government’s instant asset write-off, businesses will be able to claim the New Jobs Tax Cut as part of their regular tax return.
This minimises paperwork for busy employers
This represents a $257 million investment in getting older Australians, parents, carers and younger Australians back to work.
It will help up to 30,000 Australians find a job each year.
Our New Jobs Tax Cut will reward small businesses that invest in jobs and do their bit to get these Australians back to into work.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Fiscal Plan
LABOR HAS A CLEAR PLAN TO BUILD A STRONG AND FAIR ECONOMY FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS.
A Shorten Labor Government will: Reduce the deficit every year until the budget returns to balance.
Balance the budget in 2020-21, the same year as the Government.
Build strong surpluses over the medium term through fair savings measures that steadily and permanently improve the budget bottom line.
Labor’s reforms will achieve $10.5 billion more in budget improvement than the Government over the decade, while: Protecting Medicare.
Properly funding our schools and universities.
Investing in job-creating infrastructure.
Supporting family budgets.
Budget Repair. THAT IS FAIR
Labor has a clear plan to build a strong and fair economy for all Australians.
We will make the right investments and structural reforms today, while protecting the incomes of working and middle class families.
Labor’s responsible and fair savings improve the budget gradually and permanently over the medium term.
The Australian economy is in transition during a period of global change and immediate financial market uncertainty.
This is not the time to be making deep cuts to family budgets, education, health or job-creating infrastructure.
Budget repair must be fair to support the economy, while strengthening the Commonwealth balance sheet over time.
Under the Abbott-Turnbull Liberal Government, the budget position is deteriorating, the economy is fragile and working and middle class Australians are being left behind.
Before the last election the Liberals promised to fix the budget.
But after three years, net debt is more than $100 billion higher and the budget deficit has tripled since the Government’s first budget.
The Government has not made any meaningful contribution to budget repair.
Instead the Liberals have spent virtually all of their announced savings even though many of these savings will never pass the Parliament and never be realised.
The Liberal Government’s budget and economic policies have put Australia’s hard-earned AAA credit rating from the three major ratings agencies at risk.
The case for a change from the Liberals’ failed fiscal policies is clear.
Australians are experiencing the longest fall in living standards since records began in the 1970s.
Inequality in Australia is at its highest level in 75 years.
Household budgets are under pressure with increasing debt, lower savings and wages growing at the slowest rate on record.
The Abbott-Turnbull Liberal Government has the wrong plan for Australia.
Their policies will weaken the economy and worsen the budget over the medium term.
They are attacking the disposable incomes of millions of working and middle class families.
Malcolm Turnbull is cutting Medicare,
education
and infrastructure.
His budget strategy relies on retrospective policies and Tony Abbott’s unlegislated “zombie” measures which have been resoundingly rejected by the Australian community.
Malcolm Turnbull’s only economic plan is to deliver a $50 billion tax giveaway to big business.
Australia can not afford this reckless policy which undermines our fiscal sustainability.
The Liberal Government’s own budget papers show that the structural budget balance is expected to get worse – not better – over the medium term.
More than ever it is vital that governments pursue budget repair that helps, not hinders, broad-based prosperity and growth.
This is achieved by measured and responsible budget improvements that strengthen the budget over time, but boost growth by creating space for productivity enhancing investments that will see Australia’s standard of living rise.
That is why an elected Shorten Labor Government will strengthen the budget over the medium term through a fairer tax system and reducing tax concessions like negative gearing and capital gains.
Our responsible savings and structural reforms will steadily and permanently improve the budget bottom line, making room for critical investments in Medicare, education and infrastructure.
Labor’s plan for inclusive growth will invest in people.
Our responsible and fair approach ensures that middle and working class families are not left behind.
Right now, the Australian economy is being confronted with two challenges – supporting the domestic economy transition from the largest investment boom in the nation’s history to broader-based growth, and arresting the unprecedented decline in living standards through lifting productivity.
In this election, the contrasting budget and economic approaches of Liberal and Labor could not be starker.
Labor has been prepared to make the hard calls and the tough choices to fully fund our priorities.
That is why Labor has more budget improvements over the decade than new spending commitments.
Under Labor, deficits will decline every year over the forward estimates and, on current forecasts and projections, Labor will get the budget back into balance in the same year as the Liberal Government.
Labor’s fiscal plan will deliver stronger surpluses over the medium term, and deliver real debt repayment to strengthen our balance sheet.
Labor’s fiscal plans are fully costed, responsible and put people first.
Our Economic Plan
Australia is facing two major economic challenges: supporting our fragile economy in the short term; and lifting productivity and living standards over the long term.
Labor’s economic plan will boost growth now through nation-building infrastructure,
make our nation smarter and more productive through investing in education
and drive greater participation through protecting and strengthening Medicare.
Labor’s inclusive growth approach will ensure that middle and working class families are not left behind.
Labor’s structural reforms will deliver gradual and permanent improvements to the budget.
The current economic circumstances means that now, more than ever, is not the time to be making deep cuts to family budgets and pursuing austerity.
Labor’s approach to fiscal policy is at the heart of our economic plan.
We need to be selective and strategic in where we invest and what we prioritise.
At the same time, we also need to make fair, reasonable savings to make room for our investments and improve the long term sustainability of the budget.
Labor’s six key priorities to build a stronger, fairer economy are: 1. Investing in people – Labor will improve the quality of education and training, to drive productivity and ensure Australians are prepared for the jobs of the future.
2. Building Australia – Labor will facilitate the economic transition by investing in roads, rail and the NBN, creating jobs and improving the liveability and productivity of our cities and regions.
3. Driving investment in new industry and renewables – Labor will stand up for jobs in manufacturing and send the right signals to attract investment in renewables.
4. Supporting innovation and startups – Labor will drive jobs and innovation through tax relief and support for startups.
5. Helping small business – Labor will deliver tax cuts to small businesses while putting them on a more even playing field when it comes to competing in the marketplace.
6. Budget repair that’s fair – Labor will better target tax concessions to middle and working class families and
ensure greater female participation in the workforce.
Our Fiscal Plan
Labor has a clear budget plan that funds important investments in the near term and strengthens the budget for the decade to come.
Our comprehensive budget plan underpins our investments in a stronger, fairer economy for all Australians, including our investments in Medicare,
education
and infrastructure.
We are being upfront and honest about our plans, in contrast to the current government which deceitfully hid it’s plans for harsh cuts from the Australian people before the last election.
It is clear that the Turnbull Liberal Government is doing the same in the 2016 election as the Abbott Opposition did in the 2013 election, telling Australians one thing and doing another: Hiding their plans for a 15 per cent GST on everything.
•Double income taxation for working families.
•More harsh cuts to important services to pay for a $50 billion big business tax cut.
The Liberals’ unfair approach to the budget has damaged confidence in the economy, which has delayed the budget repair task and put Australia’s AAA credit rating at risk.
Labor’s fiscal plan is responsible and fair.
Labor will not smash the family budget to fix the Liberal Government’s mess.
Labor’s approach to fiscal policy has been guided by two objectives: funding important investments in the near term, and implementing the structural improvements required to strengthen the budget over the medium term.
An important discipline has been our commitment to achieving more budget improvements than spending over the decade.
Labor has met this commitment and will strengthen the budget through $10.5 billion more savings than spending over the decade.
On the 2016 Pre Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook (PEFO) budget forecasts and projections Labor will: Reduce the deficit every year until the budget returns to balance.
•Balance the budget in 2020-21, the same year as the Government.
•Build strong surpluses over the medium term through fair savings measures that gradually and permanently improve the budget bottom line.
Labor’s fiscal strategy is designed to ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term, while allowing flexibility in response to changing economic conditions.
Importantly, Australia will continue to have one of the lowest debt-to-GDP ratios in the developed world under a Labor Government.
Labor has prioritised the need to protect Medicare,
deliver needs-based schools funding
and boost jobs through nation-building infrastructure In the near term.
As a result Labor will achieve more modest budget improvement than the Government over the forward estimates.
However, our savings are substantial and build steadily over time, permanently improving the budget over the medium term.
The more modest fiscal consolidation over the forward estimates of around 0.2 per cent of GDP per year (on average) is more than made up for by Labor’s structural savings over the medium term.
Labor’s approach to budget management has fairness at its core, and will not seek to fix the Liberals’ budget mess by attacking family budgets.
We will budget transparently and honestly.
Labor’s plan is not built on measures so out of touch with the community that they will never pass this Parliament, or any Parliament.
Labor is sensibly and responsibly building savings through a deliberate strategy to help support the Australian economy through a transition in an uncertain global economic environment, and to run larger surpluses over the medium term.
“Fiscal consolidation should be back-loaded in light of economic uncertainties. Tax reform should be a core element of structural policy.” OECD Economic Outlook, June 2016
Making Investments Today
Labor’s plan invests in Medicare, education and job-creating infrastructure today while delivering a stronger budget over the medium term.
The Liberal Government’s approach has been to make deep and harsh cuts to Medicare, education and infrastructure, despite these investments being crucial to growing the economy and creating new jobs.
Labor has made a clear choice with our budget priorities and we will always put people first.
The modest difference between Labor’s budget position and the Government’s PEFO position over the forward estimates is entirely a result of Labor protecting Medicare and,
investing in education
skills and infrastructure.
Half the difference is due to Labor’s investments in our schools and universities.
The economic rationale for these fiscal decisions is clear – Labor will invest in human and physical capital as the key drivers of economic growth.
Labor’s approach prioritises inclusive growth.
The Australian economy would be weaker over the medium term under at Liberal Government with: Underfunded schools.
•$100,000 university degrees.
•Declining investment in roads and rail.
Unlike Labor, the Liberals’ fiscal strategy would put our long term prosperity at risk, and working and middle class families would suffer.
As the below chart demonstrates, without Labor making these positive investments in Medicare, infrastructure and education, Labor’s budget deficits would be lower than the Liberals’ over the projection years.
The Turnbull Government is continuing to make poor budget choices, for the economy and Australian working families.
The Government’s budget centrepiece is a 10 year company tax handout to big businesses and multinationals.
Compare this to Labor prioritising investment in every school as the pathway to inclusive growth.
Investing in our young people is a core Labor value that will open the door to jobs and opportunity and drive economic growth and prosperity.
Labor’s policy is supported by experts, with almost two thirds of 31 economists from the Economic Society of Australia agreeing with the statement that:Australia will receive a bigger economic growth dividend in the long-run by spending on education than offering an equivalent amount of money on a tax cut to business.
Moreover, research from the Australia Institute comparing company tax rates and education spending across OECD economies has demonstrated that there is no correlation between company tax rates and GDP per person, while there is a strong correlation between increased education spending and higher GDP per person.
Labor’s investment in Medicare is also grounded in strong economic analysis, with the link between investment in public health and economic prosperity clear – good health underpins economic growth.
This is particularly true of investment in prevention and addressing health inequalities.
There is considerable evidence that countries with better, more accessible primary care achieve better health outcomes, at lower cost, and with greater equity, than countries with a higher focus on specialist and acute care.
For business, accessible and affordable primary care through Medicare means employees remain healthy and able to work, reducing hours lost and boosting productivity across the economy.
As the OECD Observer notes, “Countries with weak health and education conditions find it harder to achieve sustained growth.”
The economic benefits from investing in infrastructure have long been recognised as a vital element for growth.
Investment in nation-building infrastructure has a double dividend – it creates jobs now but also boosts our future productive capacity.
Labor’s fiscal plan is designed to support growth in the near term, and unleash our economic potential over the medium term.
A Stronger Budget over the Medium Term
Labor’s plan will strengthen the budget over the medium term, through fair and responsible savings that steadily and permanently improve the budget bottom line.
During this term in Opposition, Labor has proposed important structural expenditure reductions to the budget in areas such as the VET-FEE HELP program, reforms to private health insurance and better targeting family payments.
Our approach improves the fairness of the tax system, rejects retrospectivity and protects the most vulnerable members of our society.
Labor is closing several tax loopholes and better targeting a number of existing tax concessions.
This is an approach supported by Martin Feldstein, Professor of Economics, Harvard University, former Chair of President Reagan’s Council of Economic Advisors, who noted that: “Reducing those [tax] subsidies, then, is really cutting government spending. The resulting deficit reductions show up on the revenue side of the budget, but the economic effect is to cut government spending. … Anyone opposed to government spending should favor removing these subsidies from the tax code.”
This approach is also supported by international ratings agency Moody’s, which sent a warning to the Government in April this year arguing that revenue measures are essential to repair the budget
Moody’s explicitly stated: “Without such [revenue] measures, limited spending cuts are unlikely to meaningfully advance the Federal Government’s aim of balanced finances by the fiscal year ending June 2021 and Government debt will likely continue to climb, a credit negative for Australia.”
The Government’s ideological refusal to reform areas like negative gearing and capital gains, for the purpose of protecting vested interests, undermines Australia’s fiscal sustainability and leaves our economy more vulnerable.
Importantly, Labor is making major budget improvements through measures that apply prospectively – not retrospectively.
This is an important principle, and one that guides Labor’s tax policy development.
Labor respects investment decisions made under existing rules and as a result of grandfathering, our budget improvements build steadily over the forward estimates before delivering a substantial fiscal dividend in the medium term.
The Liberal Government, in contrast, has announced retrospective policies that have undermined public confidence in our superannuation system.
Furthermore, the Government continues to cling to the rejected measures from Tony Abbott’s disastrous first budget, a budget that was completely at odds with community standards, based on broken promises and damaging to the economy.
Yet these harsh measures remain at the heart of Malcolm Turnbull’s budget – propping up his big business tax cut.
The Liberal Party has managed to remove Mr Abbott from the Prime Minister’s office, but they haven’t been able to remove his harsh cuts from their budget.
Malcolm Turnbull’s 2016-17 Budget is inflated by more than $30 billion of unlegislated saving measures (so called “zombie” measures), which will never pass the Parliament.
If these unlegislated measures are removed from the Government’s budget, Malcolm Turnbull’s deficit increases by 50 per cent in 2019-20, from $6 billion to $9 billion.
If the Government was honest and transparent, and abandoned the pretence that these measures will ever pass the Parliament, the Government would barely be in surplus over the medium term (grey bars below).
Labor has accounted for the reversal of these unlegislated measures in our final budget position.
This is an honest and transparent approach to fiscal policy, and also recognises that, two years on, Tony Abbott’s 2014 Budget remains a failure.
Labor’s fiscal plan, after accounting for these unlegislated measures, still sees strong surpluses build beyond 2020-21.
Budget repair requires community support, and a medium term plan that supports economic growth in the near term, while strengthening the balance sheet over time.
The Liberal Government avoids discussing the medium term because they do not have a medium term plan for the economy, and they do not want their $50 billion tax hand out to big business scrutinised.
Modelling by Janine Dixon of the Centre of Policy Studies at Victoria University shows that cutting company tax “will lead to a fall in real incomes. In present value terms, this loss is in order of $800 to $2,000 per person” and as a result “a cut to company tax is not in the national interest.”
Even Treasury modelling on which the Government relies admits that its modelling may overstate the economic gains of cutting the company tax rate.
While our savings build structurally over time, the Government’s tax cut for big business does the opposite.
Budget improvements from Labor’s negative gearing and capital gains reforms builds to around $8 billion in 2026-27.
This compares to the Government’s company tax package that costs the budget around $14 billion in 2026-27.
The Government has committed to delivering this costly tax cut for multinationals at a time when its own budget papers show that the structural position of the budget is weak, with the structural budget balance deteriorating over the medium term.
There is also a significant funding shortfall that is not accounted for in the budget, because the Liberals have not funded their Emissions Reduction Fund beyond 2020, despite committing to new 2030 emissions reduction targets.
The Australian Industry Group estimates the cost of reaching these targets through the Emissions Reduction Fund to be around $60-140 billion in today’sdollars.
If this cost was included in the accounts, the Liberal budget would never be in surplus.
If this funding is not included, Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberal Government will fail to meet Australia’s international climate obligations.
Importantly, consistent with the current budget, Labor will not simply be relying on constantly increasing average tax rates on personal income to improve the budget.
Labor will deliver stronger surpluses over the medium term due to structural budget improvements associated with negative gearing and capital gains reforms and only proceeding with the Government’s small business tax cut.
Under Labor, Australia’s tax-to-GDP ratio will continue to be low by international standards.
“Fiscal policy can also promote equality of opportunity and greater intergenerational mobility. Spending focused on increasing access to education and health can enhance social mobility and help break the inter-generational transmission of poverty and disadvantage.” International Monetary Fund, 2014
Budget Choices Matter for Inequality
Australia has the highest level of inequality in 75 years.
What Australia needs is a budget that reverses this trend, not one that exacerbates it.
The form and effect of budget repair is crucial in this task, and can have direct effects on further prosperity, inequality and growth.
Malcolm Turnbull’s approach has been to: Cut Medicare.
•Cut health and hospital services.
•Under-fund schools and price students out of university with $100,000 degrees.
•Cut pensions and family payments.
•Cut infrastructure projects.
•Roll out a copper NBN.
Three years of the Abbott-Turnbull Government has been a disaster, and Australia cannot afford three more years of failed policies.
The Liberals have the wrong plan for Australia, ignoring the recommendations of international organizations like the IMF that budget repair should “improve the access of lower-income groups to higher education and maintain access to health services.”
This isn’t just fair, it’s also good for growth.
This is precisely Labor’s approach.
Labor will deliver budget repair that doesn’t leave people behind and makes important investments that support long term, sustainable economic growth.
Labor’s plan will deliver budget repair that’s fair, while protecting Medicare
and making important investments in job-creating infrastructure.
A Shorten Labor Government will fight for middle and working class families and reverse the Liberal Government’s savage cuts.
Middle and working class families will be better off under Labor.
For example, under Labor: A couple with two young children where one parent earns $75,000 and the other $15,000 will be around $2,322 better off.
•A single parent with two teenage children earning $65,000 a year will be around $3,453 better off.
•A couple with two young children where one parent earns $80,000 and the other $25,000 will be around $1,665 better off.
Budget repair under Labor will occur without smashing family budgets.
Only Labor will stand up for families, because only Labor will put people first.
A Budget with More Transparency Independence
Australian people and financial markets should be able to trust the integrity of government budgets and economic forecasts.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government has abused the Charter of Budget Honesty requirements and debased budget documents for their own political gain.
That is why Labor will strengthen Australia’s budget framework and move towards international best practice by expanding the mandate of the independent Parliamentary Budget Office to ensure greater confidence and independence in economic and fiscal decision-making.
Labor’s reforms will see an enhanced and expanded Parliamentary Budget Office that: Prepares macroeconomic forecasts that underpin all key budget statements and updates.
•Prepares and publishes the Intergenerational Report (IGR) every five years.
•Prepares and publishes an annual structural budget balance.
These reforms will improve the quality of the debate over budget and economic forecasts.
For example, the recent budget forecast nominal growth of 4.5 per cent in 2016-17 was highly contested by a range of economists and ratings agencies.
These reforms won’t eliminate differences of opinion about the forecasts but they will help to ensure they are prepared without political bias.
An incoming Labor Government will move promptly to bring clarity to the budget by bringing forward the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO) to within the first 100 days of Government.
This will be an opportunity to reflect the new Government’s priorities, implement our budget improvement measures and start the task of repairing the budget position left behind by the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
2016 -17 BUDGET
Labor’s fiscal position reflects the impact of all Labor’s measures against the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook, which includes all the recent 2016-17 Budget measures.
Labor has taken the following positions which do not have a fiscal impact: Given Labor’s concerns about the Government’s superannuation changes, including retrospective elements, Labor would consult with stakeholders and take a broader examination of all these measures on coming to government.
Labor would also investigate how to replace the 2016-17 Budget Efficiency Dividend measure and the 2015-16 MYEFO Efficiency Target for national cultural and collecting institutions in the 2017-18 Budget with new measures aimed to achieve the same level of budget savings through genuine efficiencies that are not targeted at staffing, including targeting contractor and consultant costs, advertising and travel.
The Opposition has not been given the opportunity to properly scrutinise the Government’s removal of the clean energy supplement or seek advice from the Department on its effects.
In government, Labor will seek further advice on the impacts of this measure.
Labor has already confirmed that we will conduct an independent review of the adequacy of the Newstart Allowance – to ensure it can keep people out of poverty while also helping people into work.
Budget Impact of Labor´s Decisions
•Labor has worked closely with the independent Parliamentary Budget Office over the last three years in costing our policies.
•Labor has a fully costed budget plan over the forward estimates and medium term.
•All of the policy costings have been fully assessed and reviewed by an independent costing panel.
Mr  Chris  Bowen Shadow Treasurer Australian  Labor  PartyDear Chris,We have been engaged  by you  to examine  and assess the  Australian Labor Party’s federal election policy costings.The scope of our work was purely confined to an examination of the  costings and the  process by which they have been  prepared  by the Parliamentary Budget Office.All of  the  policy  costings in  Labor’s  Budget  Plan  have  been  submitted  to  the  panel and  have  been  fully assessed and reviewed.In assessing Labor’s  election policy costings, we have had  access to  all costings undertaken  by the Parliamentary Budget Office and  have assessed  all the calculation  methods used  to  cost Labor’s election  policy  commitments.We note that more than  half of the costings have capped  funding and  therefore present a high  degree of certainty. Where assumptions have been  made around  potential behavioural responses, we have relied  upon  the assessments of the Parliamentary Budget Office.To  this  end, we  note  that  these estimates, and medium term projections, are  subject to the  same  degree of uncertainty as that described in Commonwealth Budgets, whether they are  prepared by theParliamentary Budget  Office or the Treasury and  Finance Departments.We are satisfied  that the Parliamentary Budget Office has, in developing  its cost estimates and forecasts, applied  established  Budget standards and  practices.We are of the opinion  that:•The  policy  costing  process  has  been thorough  and  comprehensive•The  assumptions  which  underpin  Parliamentary  Budget  Office  costings are sound•All of  the costings in  Labor’s Budget Plan  are  of a  similar quality as Budget estimates generally, and therefore represent a reasonable basis  for assessing the net financial  impact on the Commonwealth  Budget.Yours  sincerelyProf Robert Officer, AM Dr  Michael Keating, AC  Mr  James  MacKenzieCostings panel biographiesProfessor Officer is one of Australia’s best known financial academics and public administrators. He has played a substantive role in advising governments and regulatory bodies on a range of issues associated with infrastructure assets as well as consulting to public, private and government organisations on a vast range of financial and policy issues. He is Emeritus Professor, University of Melbourne (Professor of Finance at Melbourne Business School from 1986 to 2002). He has held a Chair at Monash (1976-1986), Readership at the University of Queensland (1972-1976) and Visiting Professorships at the Universities of Stanford, Rochester and the Wharton School.He holds degrees in agriculture and agricultural economics from Australian universities and an MBA and PhD from the University of Chicago. An experienced Board member and Chairman, current and former roles include: •Chairman, Acorn Capital •Chairman, Victorian WorkCover Authority •Chairman, Victorian Commission of Audit •Chairman, Victorian Funds Management Corporation •Chairman, National Commission of Audit •Director, Transport Accident Commission of Victoria •Board member, Transurban •Board member, Bank of Melbourne •President and Life Member of the Accounting Association of Australia and New Zealand n Senior Fellow, Securities Institute of Australia. In 2003, Professor Officer was awarded the Centenary Medal for services to the public sector. In 2012, he was made a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) for service to business and education in the field of financial economic theory; as a leader of public and private sector institutions; as an adviser to government; and as an academic administrator.Dr Michael Keating, ACDr Keating is one of Australia’s most respected former senior public servants and leading economists. As Head of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet from 1991 to 1996 and the Department of Finance from 1986 to 1991, Dr Keating was at the forefront of some of Australia’s most significant economic reforms.He also served as Head of the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations from 1983 to 1986. Dr Keating has also had a highly successful academic career and was a Visiting Fellow in the Economics Program at the Australian National University from 1997 to 2007, and an Adjunct Professor at Griffith University from 1997 to 2001. He is currently again a Visiting Fellow at the Australian National University.A widely published author, Dr Keating’s research has focussed on the integration of social and economic policy, particularly as it relates to improving labour market outcomes; and the changing relationship between citizens and the state. Dr Keating’s other previous and current roles include:•Chairman of the Committee for Sustainable Retirement Incomes •Director, Insight Economics n Director of Australia Post n Director of Fujitsu Australia •Member of the Australian National University Council and its Finance Committee •Board member of Skills Australia, and the Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency•Member of the Economic Development Board of South Australia •Member of the Training and Skills Commission of South Australia n Chairman of the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal (NSW) •Chairman of the Community and Clinicians Expert Advisory Council for Health (NSW) In January 1990, Dr Keating was made an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO) in recognition of his public service, and in 1996 he was made a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC), for service to social, economic and public sector reform. In 2001 Dr Keating was awarded the Centenary Medal of Australia.Mr James MacKenzieMr James MacKenzie is an experienced Australian public company director. A Chartered Accountant by profession, Mr MacKenzie was a Partner in both the Melbourne and Hong Kong offices of an international accounting firm now part of Deloitte.Mr MacKenzie has served as a director of a number of public companies listed on both Australian and international stock exchanges. He was Co-Vice Chairman of Yancoal Australia Limited and Chairman of Mirvac Group; he also chaired Gloucester Coal Ltd and Pacific Brands Ltd.He has been a director of prominent Australian funds management companies Australian Prime Property Fund, Portfolio Partners Limited and the Victorian Funds Management Corporation. He was reappointed to the VFMC Board as Chairman in June 2015.Mr MacKenzie’s current roles include: •Chairman, Victorian Funds Management Corporation •President, Victorian Arts Centre Trust •Chairman, ShineWing Australia •Director, Maurice Blackburn Lawyers n Director, Melco Crown Entertainment Limited •Director, Building QueenslandMr MacKenzie has also served as CEO of the Transport Accident Commission; CEO of Norwich Union Australia; and Managing Director of Funds Management and Insurance at ANZ Bank. He is a Fellow of both the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia and the Australian Institute of Company Directors. In 2001, Mr MacKenzie was awarded the Centenary Medal for services to Public Administration.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent. University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS.
WE ARE UNITED. WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Giving the Consumer Watchdog More Teeth
This policy suite is designed to deter and punish anti-competitive and anti-consumer conduct by increasing penalties, using some of the increased revenue from these penalties to increase the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission’s (ACCC) litigation budget, and give the ACCC formal powers to conduct market studies in the public interest.
The case for change
There is a broad public concern about the lack of competition in Australian markets.
This concern is not limited to banks, supermarkets and petrol retailers.
Many people are worried that Australia’s markets are not sufficiently competitive in a range of areas.
At the same time, penalties for engaging in anti-competitive conduct and for breaching the rights of consumers are inadequate.
Penalties are too small to act as a deterrent, are low by international standards and are seen as a mere “cost of doing business” according to the Federal Court [i], [ii], the ACCC [iii], and consumer advocates [iv].
For example, the ACCC has appealed the $1.7 million penalty imposed on Reckitt Benckiser for misleading or deceptive conduct regarding Nurofen products.
The penalty was small relative to company turnover and the profits made on the products, and is unlikely to have a deterrence effect [v].
Over the last 5 years we have seen a range of appalling contraventions of consumer rights, often targeting the most vulnerable members of our community.
These include predatory consumer leasing agreements, breaches of product safety standards, scams and misleading advertising [vi].
The maximum penalty a corporation faces for breaching the Australian Consumer Law (‘the ACL’) is $1.1 million.
This is very small relative to the annual revenue of large companies.
It is one-tenth the size of the maximum penalty under the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (‘the CCA’) competition provisions.
Whether it involves cracking down on misleading consumers, inappropriate market practices with suppliers, or busting cartels, Australians want to know that they have a strong competition regulator on the beat.
The primary criticism of the ACCC is that it lacks teeth because of insufficient penalties, which is a legislative constraint imposed on the Commission.
What is Labor’s proposal?
Labor will: Increase civil penalties under the Australian Consumer Law from a maximum of $1.1 million to $10 million, bringing penalties in-line with the competition provisions of the Competition and Consumer Act 2010.
Adopt the EU’s penalty system for anti-competitive conduct, which is based on 30 per cent of the annual sales of the relevant product or service, multiplied by the number of years the infringement took place, limited to the greater of 10 per cent of annual turnover or $10 million (as per existing threshold).
Use some of the revenues from increased penalties to increase the ACCC’s litigation budget from its current level of $24.5 million to a maximum of twice that level ($49 million).
Amend the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 to give a market studies function to the ACCC to explore public interest issues such as pricing discrepancies and increased market concentration.
How will it work?
The policy package will require legislative amendments to the CCA.
The policy package deters and punishes unscrupulous conduct by businesses that hurt consumers – particularly vulnerable community members.
It builds upon the reforms announced in Labor’s Fairer Markets for a Fairer Australiapolicy.
The policy package fosters competitive markets as per the original intention of the CCA and ACL.
Competitive markets improve consumer welfare, drive innovation, increase production and job creation and reduce the cost of living.
The proposed anti-competitive conduct and market studies reforms bring Australia in line with international best practice (including the EU and UK).
Currently the ACCC escalates about 60 consumer and fair trading cases per quarter from approximately 10,000 complaints.
An increased litigation budget will assist in prosecuting large and complex cases without decreasing the number of escalated cases.
An increase in the litigation budget signals the ACCC will have the capacity to pursue the most egregious breaches.
These breaches warrant the highest penalties but also involve complex litigation.
A market studies function was recommended by the Harper Review.
Market studies explore competition issues of public interest such as increased market concentration, [ix] the impacts on inequality in certain markets, and to ensure markets are functioning in the best interests of consumers.
Australia is an outlier internationally, having no body with a fully independent market studies function.
Formal market studies can guide policy makers, instigate legal action, and inform consumer information campaigns.
We believe the ACCC is a natural fit for market studies, our proposal formalises and significantly expands some of the market study functions available to the ACCC.
The recent laundry detergent cartel [xi] demonstrates the reality of such behaviour in Australia.
A new penalty formulation in the CCA will guide courts to more appropriate, higher penalties.
This policy will deter and punish unconscionable conduct, ultimately leading to better outcomes for consumers and more competitive markets.
Labor’s record
The Labor Party is the party of the Trade Practices Act 1974, the National Competition Policy, the Australian Consumer Law (ACL) and the criminalisation of cartels.
Australians can trust Labor to get it right when it comes to competition and consumer protection.
The ACL is a vital piece of legislation that protects consumers from things like unconscionable conduct, unfair contracts, unsafe products, misleading conduct and scams.
The ACL brought together State, Territory and Federal governments, and was implemented by the previous Labor Government.
Liberals’ record
Labor, in contrast to a divided Liberal Cabinet, is united and releasing tangible policies, including strengthening the ACCC, Australia’s frontline defence of competition and consumer issues.
The Liberal Government has not supported the ACCC to pursue litigation.
In a recent annual report, Rod Sims noted the difficulty in operating in a constrained fiscal environment [xii].
Financial Implications (PBO)
The costed components are expected to increase the underlying cash and fiscal balances by $62.4 million over the 2015-16 Budget forward estimates period.
This represents an increase in revenue of $111.4 million from the increased ACL civil penalties component which is partially offset by the increased departmental expenditure of $49.0 million associated with the increased ACCC litigation budget.
Tackling inequality and disadvantage
We will always have problems if we allow inequality to continue.
That’s why Labor is committed to tackling inequality.
Labor has to stand up for people who are less off and that’s what our policies will do.
POSITIVE POLICY
Frontline Funds for Family Violence
We have a responsibility to ensure women have somewhere safe to go if they’re being abused – whether that is their own home, or somewhere else.
The nightmare of family violence is a reality for far too many Australian women.
No-one should have to face this ordeal on their own.
The latest research shows: 1 in 3 Australian women have experienced physical violence since the age of 15
17 per cent of Australian women have experienced violence by a current or previous partner in their lifetime;
and 20 per cent of Australian women who have experienced current partner violence reported it to police. (ANROWS; Personal Safety Survey, ABS 2012)
Labor will deliver more than $70 million over three years in targeted funding to ensure those suffering from family violence can access critical services when they need them.
Labor will commit almost $50 million to frontline legal services, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services, to ensure women suffering from family violence get legal support.
The aim of this is to ensure, at least, that women facing court have access to appropriate legal services.
We will also make an initial investment of $15 million in Safe at Home grants to help people affected by family violence stay safe in their own home.
In addition, Labor will invest $8 million in perpetrator mapping to look at the interactions across family violence, law enforcement, justice, child protection and related systems to help identify opportunities to prevent violence through information sharing.
Labor’s plan has been developed in consultation with experts, academics and advocates like Australian of the Year, Rosie Batty.
POSITIVE POLICY
Supporting Stronger Disability Advocates
A Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $2 million a year to peak disability advocacy organisations to ensure people with disability have a powerful voice in the debates and decisions that affect their lives.
People with disability and their advocates spent decades fighting for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Now, because of their hard work, the NDIS is real.
As the NDIS rolls out across the country, independent advocacy for people with disability becomes more important, not less.
Advocacy organisations help people with disability ensure their rights are protected; help them make decisions about their lives; and make sure their voices are heard in matters that affect them.
The additional funding that Labor is committing will ensure disability advocacy peak bodies have secure funding into the future, so they and the people they work for have certainty.
This funding will also support new and emerging organisations to advocate on behalf of people with diverse sets of disabilities.
In contrast to Labor’s strong support for advocacy, the Liberals have done all they can to silence the voices of people with disability.
The Liberals have cut funding for peak disability advocacy organisations.
Organisations like the Australian Federation of Disability Organisations, Deaf Australia and Blind Citizens Australia had their future thrown into uncertainty.
While a very small part of this funding has since been reinstated, this funding is inadequate and the future of these organisations remains in doubt after 1 July 2016.
The Liberals also abolished the full-time Disability Discrimination Commissioner, Graeme Innes, silencing another powerful voice for people with disability, only recently reinstating the position.
Under Labor, people with disability will have strong advocates to make sure their interests are never sidelined, never ignored and never forgotten.
POSITIVE POLICY
National Redress Scheme
For too long in this country, children in the care of institutions were subjected to appalling sexual abuse and terrible violence.
No country should stand by and let this happen.
No country should stand by and let perpetrators get away with these crimes.
Most importantly, no country should stand by and do nothing to help with the healing of survivors.
A Shorten Labor Government will establish a National Redress Scheme for survivors of institutional child sexual abuse.
The establishment a National Redress Scheme is a key recommendation of the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse, and is a critical part of the process of healing.
Under Labor, it will happen.
Labor has carefully considered the recommendations of the Royal Commission with a full heart and open mind, knowing how important this issue of redress is to survivors.
In its final report on redress and civil litigation, the Royal Commission determined that around 60,000 survivors of child sexual abuse should be given access to redress.
Labor is committed to ensuring they get the redress they deserve.
In line with the Royal Commission’s recommendations, Labor believes the cost of redress must be met by institutions responsible for the perpetrators of the abuse.
Labor will contribute $33 million to the National Redress Scheme.
As part of meeting its responsibility, a Shorten Labor Government will commit an initial $20 million to the establishment a National Redress Agency.
The National Redress Agency will oversee the implementation of a National Redress Scheme for victims of child sexual abuse in institutional settings.
This initial $20 million contribution will support the National Redress Agency to work with state and territory governments and responsible institutions to make this happen.
Labor strongly believes that redress should be survivor focused.
All redress should be offered, assessed and provided with appropriate regard to the needs of particularly vulnerable survivors.
Labor is committed to helping survivors of institutional abuse heal – putting in place the right support and redress mechanisms will play a central role in that healing.
POSITIVE POLICY
Empowering Indigenous Girls
We cannot close the gap in disadvantage between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians without investing in the educational opportunities of Indigenous girls and young women.
Right now, less than six in ten Indigenous female students complete secondary school as opposed to eight in ten non-Indigenous students.
Labor believes we must invest in engaging young people at school and beyond to have full opportunity to participate in further training, education and work.
Low engagement with education creates economic and social disadvantage, but when Indigenous students achieve Year 12 or its equivalent, there is almost no disparity in employment between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
That is why Labor will partner with the Stars Foundation to empower Indigenous girls through education and gender equity.
We will build on their existing programs in schools in the Northern Territory, to provide 7155 student places through an expanded program in the Northern Territory and new programs in New South Wales, Queensland, Western Australia and Victoria.
The program supports Indigenous girls and young women at risk of disengaging from education, providing full-time school-based mentors including sport, art, music, dance and community experiences to achieve targets and outcomes.
There is a need to provide gender equity in school-based engagement programs for Indigenous girls and young women.
Over recent years, significant investment has been directed at male youth, resulting in improved outcomes for young Indigenous men. But this has not been the case for young women.
Labor’s $8.4 million investment will direct resources to the only national organisation solely dedicated to the engagement, development and empowerment of Indigenous girls and young women.
Labor believes we cannot be a fair and inclusive Australia without engaging and empowering Indigenous girls and young women.
POSITIVE POLICY
Empowering Young Australians To Participate In Our Democracy
Today, more than at any other time in Australia’s history, the policy challenges affecting our nation’s future will play out not over a number of years, but over generations.
While no Australian under the age of 40 has experienced a recession in their adult lives, the need for reform to ensure that our economy remains productive, competitive and sustainable into the future will require generational decision-making.
For the young people of today, grappling with these policy challenges will be a centrepiece of their adult lives.
Research by the Whitlam Institute has shown that ‘young people want to be involved in decision-making processes and should be offered opportunities to do so within existing political structures’.
Encouraging their participation will encourage greater transparency and engagement, inspire short term issues-based or community-centred action to improve longer term decision making processes and value and acknowledge the contribution of young people through a process of accountability back to those young people.
Accordingly, Labor believes they deserve a say at the ballot box about the future direction of our nation.
As part of a broad strategy to engage young Australians in the political system and empower them to drive and guide change, Labor proposes the following:
Expanding the electoral franchise to Australians aged under 18
Improving the enrolment of individuals once they reach voting age
Better ways to improve the engagement of young people with disability, young Indigenous people, and young people living in outer suburban, regional and remote Australia.
POSITIVE POLICY
Indigenous Justice Target
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver a nationally coordinated approach to close the gap in Indigenous incarceration and victimisation rates.
These rates have reached a crisis point.
A young Indigenous man is more likely to go to jail than university.
An Indigenous adult is 15 times more likely to be imprisoned than a non-Indigenous adult and an Indigenous child is 24 times more likely to be in detention.
And an Indigenous woman is 34 time more likely to be hospitalised as a result of family violence than other women. This is unacceptable.
Labor will apply leadership and innovation to address the justice gap – though community-driven and national strategies that empower communities to address the complex causes of incarceration and crime.
Labor believes we cannot close the gap in education, health and employment disadvantage between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians without national leadership to change the record and build safer, stronger communities.
POSITIVE POLICY
Republic Timeline
In the 21st century we no longer hide behind the walls of fortress Australia, seeing ourselves as an outpost of empire, fearfully perched on the edge of Asia.
We no longer take a narrow, race-based notion of citizenship.
We celebrate diversity, we are grateful to count people from every nation, culture, tradition and faith as our own.
We should go to our region and the world proudly independent – declaring that we are no longer going to borrow a monarch from another country on the other side of the world.
Our constitution came into being as an act of the British parliament – 114 years later, our nation has changed, our place in the world has changed, and our constitution should change with it.
The republic debate is a chance for all of us to bring our constitution home, to vote our national birth certificate into existence as an Australian document, for our times.
An expression of the sovereign will of all Australians, where, unlike in 1901, the voices of women and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people will be heard.
Labor believes in modernising our Constitution to appoint an Australian as our Head of State.
Labor will actively promote and campaign for an Australian Republic by establishing a clear plan to build the case for an Australian republic and the process to achieve it.
Labor's roadmap to a republic will include thorough consultation with the Australian people through: A Constitutional Convention;
A plebiscite to gauge support for an Australian Head of State, and a preferred model of appointment and a referendum to formally adopt a change.
In a future Labor Government a member of the Executive will be appointed with the responsibility of promoting the benefits of an Australian Head of State, and building awareness of the process for Constitutional reform and the nature of proposed changes.
POSITIVE POLICY
Youth Jobs Pathway
Youth unemployment is much too high in Australia.
For the last 12 months the average trend unemployment rate has been 12.9 per cent for people aged 15 to 24 and 18.4 per cent for those aged 15 to 19.
There are now more than 255,000 young people who are unemployed, including 138,000 aged between 15 and 19.
Labor understands that without a successful transition from study to work, young people will experience life-long employment disadvantage.
The costs to the community of that disadvantage are well known.
Labor won’t let young people fall between the cracks into a lifetime of unemployment and reliance on welfare.
We will help young people move from unemployment to work through Youth Jobs Connect.
3000 young people who are at risk of life-long employment disadvantage will complete an intensive six month pilot program to help them get and keep a job.
Youth Jobs Connect will be piloted in 15 locations where youth unemployment is significantly above the national average.
Youth Jobs Connect will provide one-on-one coaching to help young people in areas of high youth unemployment make realistic decisions about available career opportunities that will work for them, as well as the education and skills they will need to get there.
Employers have identified that young job seekers are often not job-ready.
They need employees who are reliable, willing to learn and able to fit into the workplace
That’s why we will support the program’s young participants to tackle barriers to employment like literacy and numeracy, homelessness and mental health.
They will also receive training in the core skills that are necessary to gain employment and participate effectively in the workplace.
This includes skills like punctuality, communication, self-management, planning, decision making and problem solving.
Importantly, the program will broker opportunities for work experience with local employers so young people get a practical understanding of what employers expect and what careers they may want to pursue.
And young people themselves will receive mentoring and support to find and keep a job.
We won’t let young Australians fall behind because they’re struggling to get into work.
Labor’s $21 million Youth Jobs Connect pilot will help get more young people working and pursue a new approach to helping young Australians make successful transitions from school into employment.
POSITIVE POLICY
Marriage Equality
Labor will legislate for marriage equality within the first 100 days of the next parliament.
At its heart, marriage equality is about removing discrimination from our laws.
It is a recognition that love between two people of the same gender is of equal meaning, equal value and entitled to equal respect.
Marriage equality is a simple, overdue change to Australian law our Parliament could deal with in one day of considered debate culminating in a free vote.
Couples could sit in the Parliamentary galleries and gather on the lawns to celebrate the moment when their love became equal in law.
Since the campaign to decriminalise homosexuality, to the present day, Labor Governments have consistently been at the forefront of removing discrimination and fighting for the equal rights of LGBTI Australians.
Labor opposes Malcolm Turnbull’s $160m dangerous and divisive plebiscite on marriage equality.
A plebiscite could act as a lightning rod for the very worst of the prejudice so many LGBTI Australians endure.
The plebiscite will turn into a platform for people to attack, abuse and demean Australians on the basis of who they love.
The fact is, casual, unthinking discrimination and deliberate, malicious homophobia are still far too common in our society.
Two out of five young Australians who are gay have thought about self-harm or suicide.
A young Australian who identifies as gay is six times more likely to consider taking their own life, compared to their sibling, classmate, colleague or teammate.
Malcolm Turnbull’s plebiscite will give a taxpayer-funded platform and a megaphone to the very worst forms of hateful abuse we will only add to the burden too many Australians have to bear.
POSITIVE POLICY
Family Violence Paid Leave
Labor is committed to addressing the national disgrace that is family and domestic violence.
Intimate partner violence is the leading contributor to death, disability and ill-health in Australian women aged 15-44.
Over 12 months, on average, one woman is killed every week as a result of intimate partner violence.
The number of women affected by domestic and family violence negatively impacts business productivity across Australia.
The Department of Social Services reports that violence against women and their children cost the Australian economy an estimated $13.6 billion in 2009.
Without appropriate action to address violence against women and their children, an estimated three-quarters of a million Australian women will experience and report violence in the period of 2021-22, costing the Australian economy an estimated $15.6 billion.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will provide for five days paid domestic and family violence leave in the National Employment Standards.
The National Employment Standards provide statutory minimum conditions for all employees – women and men – covered by the national workplace relations system.
Labor’s plan is a part of the solution to reduce the costs of domestic and family violence to individuals suffering domestic violence, as well as businesses and the Australian economy.
Those who have access to the leave entitlement will retain their job and income, which gives women choice, reduces isolation, and helps them to care for their children and provides them with a safe home environment.
Providing those impacted by domestic violence with time to attend court appearances and related appointments, to seek legal advice and make relocation arrangements will contribute to employees returning to work and contributing to business productivity.
Labor will provide the necessary educational support to employers, particularly small businesses, to implement the mandatory arrangements.
Labor believes businesses, which already offer a variety of forms of leave, including sick leave, annual leave, and long service leave, will see a reduction in lost revenue associated with absenteeism and decreased productivity.
It is vital for people who have experienced family and domestic violence that their workplace understands the impact violence has on their lives, and for leave arrangements to be handled sensitively and confidentially, which will happen as part of Labor’s plan.
POSITIVE POLICY
National Family Violence Summit
There is no clearer symbol of continuing gender inequality in our society than the epidemic of violence against women.
The biggest risk factor for being a victim of family violence is being a woman. 1 in 3 Australian women have experienced physical violence since the age of 15.
That’s not good enough; in fact that is a crisis.
That is why Labor will commission a National Crisis Summit within 100 days of coming to government.
A national crisis summit on violence against women is required for the Commonwealth, state and territory governments to agree to urgently implement coordinated judicial and social services reform within their areas of responsibility to better deal with family violence.
A national crisis summit on violence against women is the best way for stakeholders to openly and transparently lay down the key policy challenges for addressing family violence.
Family violence isolates, excludes and traumatises its victims - it disconnects people from community, work, education, friends and family.
In recent years there has been a growth in public awareness and the evidence base for tackling family violence.
The National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children (National Plan) put in place by Labor in office (2010-2022) has driven a range of world leading strategies as well as action by community and for-profit sectors.
Over the past few years, considerable evidence has emerged through the South Australian Parliamentary Inquiry into Domestic and Family Violence, the Special Taskforce on Domestic and Family Violence in Queensland and the Commonwealth Senate Inquiry – Domestic violence in Australia and further evidence is being gathered in the landmark Victorian Royal Commission into Family Violence.
The National Crisis Summit seeks to build on this work with a program for clear action - to prioritise, bring forward innovation and better coordination.
And ultimately, to end the ‘postcode lottery’ that results in different outcomes for victims in different locations.
From the Summit, a Federal Labor Government will seek a new deal on coordinated judicial and social services reform to better respond and prevent family violence.
POSITIVE POLICY
Community Sector Partnership
Under a Shorten Government, the Labor Community Sector Partnership will meet regularly to inform and advise on the best approaches to tackling new and emerging community issues.
Since going into Opposition, we’ve continued to work on ways to strengthen civil society.
One of the vehicles for this is Labor’s Community Sector Partnership, which met for the first time in April 2015.
It brings together leaders from the community sector to outline priorities for social policy reform and set a new agenda for working together to deliver positive social change.
The partnership is about providing a mechanism for Government and the community sector to work together to design, implement and deliver policy.
It is an important first step in developing new approaches to solving complex problems.
POSITIVE POLICY
Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have a unique place in our nation as Australia’s first peoples and as custodians of the oldest continuing cultures in the world.
Australia’s Constitution needs to change to recognise the history, language and culture of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and reflect our nation’s fundamental belief in the importance of equality and non-discrimination.
Labor wants meaningful and substantive change, change that unites the nation and reflects the hopes and aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
Labor is working to build public support for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
POSITIVE POLICY
Royal Commission into the Financial Services Industry
Confidence and trust in Australia’s financial services industry has taken a huge hit after an ongoing range of scandals and high profile consumer rip offs in recent years.
Retirees have had their retirement savings gutted.
Families have been rorted out of hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Small business owners have lost everything.
Life insurance policy holders have been denied justice.
There are literally tens of thousands of victims, if not more.
Enough is enough.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will hold a Royal Commission into misconduct in the banking and financial services industry.
This is an important decision that was not taken lightly – it has been made after careful consideration over an extended period of time.
This sector employs almost half a million people and is the fastest growing in the Australian economy.
We have one of the strongest banking systems in the world and Labor wants to make it even stronger.
We need Australians to have confidence in their banks and financial institutions, to sweep away the doubt, to uncover and deal with unethical behaviour that compromises that confidence.
Even the Prime Minister has expressed concern about illegal and unethical behaviour in the banking sector: “There have been too many troubling incidents over recent times for them simply to be dismissed.” (MALCOLM TURNBULL, SPEECH TO WESTPAC’S 199TH BIRTHDAY, WEDNESDAY 6 APRIL 2016)
Every Australian uses a bank and every Australian relies on the integrity of the banks – we need to restore that trust and confidence.
After a damaging series of Liberal cuts to ASIC, getting to the bottom of the wide-ranging and severe issues uncovered in recent years is now beyond the capacity of regulators.
A Royal Commission into the financial services industry will examine issues such as:how widespread instances of illegal and unethical behaviour are within Australia’s financial services industry;
how Australia’s financial services institutions treat their duty of care to their customers;
how the culture, ethical standards and business structures of Australian financial services institutions affect the behaviour of these institutions;
whether Australia’s regulators are really equipped to identify and prevent illegal and unethical behaviour;
comparable international experience with similar financial services industry misconduct and best practice responses to those incidents; and
other events as may come to light in the course of investigating the above.
This proposal for a Royal Commission into Australia’s Financial Services Industry has been costed by the independent Parliamentary Budget Office at $53 million over two years.
There are Members of Parliament in the Liberal and National Parties who are fed up with hard-working people in their communities getting ripped off.
The Government should listen to these MPs and the concerns of the Australian community and support Labor’s call for a Royal Commission.
POSITIVE POLICY
Small Business Ombudsman – Access to Justice
Small business owners and operators want an even playing field when they are competing in the market place.
Feedback and surveys consistently show this is amongst the leading concerns of small businesses.
Anti-competitive behaviour damages the economy, jobs and future growth.
Small businesses know this better than most.
A new idea to provide goods and services can disrupt a market, competing against established businesses. The constant change driven by small and growing businesses across Australia is one of the most important factors for productivity and growth.
Research shows young, small businesses are one of the most important drivers of new net jobs in the labour market.
Small businesses play a central role in the economy.
Over 2 million businesses – sole traders, partnerships, trusts and small employers – have helped underpin 25 years of economic growth.
Practical support for competition policy is a priority for Labor.
Labor will ensure a more even playing field for private litigants, so that small businesses and their industry representatives can better use existing legislation to prove the abuse of competition under Part IV of the Competition and Consumer Act.
At an early stage of the court case, the private litigant will be able to request a ‘no adverse cost order’, preventing large legal fees of the defendant being transferred to the litigant.
The judge will then weigh up the initial arguments and decide whether there is merit to the case.
If merit is established, any liability for the defendant’s legal fees will be waived.
To assist in this process, a Labor Government will fund the Small Business Ombudsman to provide an initial assessment on whether a private litigant is likely to be granted a no adverse cost order.
The representatives of small business private litigants will be able to submit their proposal to the Ombudsman and receive a professional opinion on the likelihood of success.
While this will not be legally binding, the Ombudsman will assist small businesses better understand their prospects of successful action under the Competition and Consumer Act.
POSITIVE POLICY
Human Rights Commissioners
A Shorten Labor Government will appoint a full-time Disability Discrimination Commissioner to the Australian Human Rights Commission.
Discrimination against people with disability is still far too common in Australia.
People with disability face discrimination in the workplace, when accessing services and in the community.
Complaints relating to breaches of the Disability Discrimination Act are consistently the most common complaint received by the Commission.
That’s why Australia needs a dedicated Disability Discrimination Commissioner – because people with disability deserve a powerful voice to advocate their interests.
Upon taking office, a Shorten Labor Government will immediately begin the process of appointing a full-time Disability Discrimination Commissioner.
In the horror 2014 Budget, the Liberal Government cut funding for the Human Rights Commission and sacked Graeme Innes – Australia’s longest-serving Disability Discrimination Commissioner and a powerful advocate for Australians with disability, their families and carers.
A Shorten Labor Government will right this wrong.
This change will result in the Age Discrimination Commissioner also returning to a full-time role, ending the forced sharing of the two job roles which has occurred under the Liberal Government.
The new Disability Discrimination Commissioner will have a special focus on removing barriers to employment for people with disability, and will work with business, governments and the community sector to boost job opportunities for Australians with disability.
This is just one part of Labor’s plan to strengthen the voices of Australians with disability.
A Shorten Labor Government will also provide an additional $2 million a year to peak disability advocacy organisations so that people with disability have the biggest say in the decisions and debates that affect their lives.
Federal Labor has a proud record of delivering greater support for people with disability.
Labor designed, funded and introduced the National Disability Insurance Scheme, which is already transforming the lives of thousands of people with disability, their families and carers.
POSITIVE POLICY
Advancing Australian Multiculturalism
A Shorten Labor Government will renew investment in Australian multiculturalism, with $28.3 million of new funding to support social cohesion and economic inclusion.
A Shorten Labor Government will renew investment in Australian multiculturalism, with $28.3 million of new funding to support social cohesion and economic inclusion.
Investing in new humanitarian migrants means promoting economic opportunity.
We know the ability to speak English is the single most important factor in getting a job.
By funding migrant support properly in the short term, Australia will be better off over the long term.
By ensuring our programs and policies continue to improve, more new migrants can fully participate.
Australia is one of the most diverse societies across the globe.
This was no accident and has been the result of hard work.
We cannot stop now.
Promoting social cohesion and economic inclusion will see the multicultural dividend grow into the future.
In the coming financial year, Australia will see one of the largest humanitarian programs in our history, with over 20,000 new humanitarian migrants expected to arrive and settle in Australia.
Many will be from Syria and Iraq, where people are fleeing persecution.
Labor’s plan will ensure every new humanitarian migrant is given the best possible start to life in Australia.
An Office for Multicultural Affairs will be created in the Australian Public Service to improve coordination, policy development, research and evaluation, and program management.
Labor will invest $11.3 million to fund capital works for settlement and community sector organisations.
For too long, support for new and established migrant communities has occurred without the necessary infrastructure.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government, in one of their first decisions in 2013, slashed the Building Multicultural Communities program.
Even after letters of successful grants had been received by many organisations, overdue projects were snatched away at the last minute.
Labor will also invest in the people who support new and established migrant communities. A funding stream of $7.5 million will help organisations build critical skills in their staff.
From community leadership to volunteer management to bilingual engagement, these skills are vital to support new migrants settle into society and the labour market.
These policies have been informed from the grassroots.
After listening to settlement and multicultural organisations who live and breathe support for new migrants, Labor has the right plan to ensure future citizens are given the support they need.
This investment represents a stark contrast to the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Instead of asking settlement and multicultural organisations to do more with less, as we saw in the Budget, a Labor Government will invest in organisations to help new humanitarian migrants succeed.
POSITIVE POLICY
Water Safe: Labor’s National Water Safety Education Program
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $40.9 million to roll out a national water safety education program to every primary school student in Australia, ensuring all Australian children have the necessary training and skills to be safe around water.
Australians live by the water.
Being in and around water is part of our culture and identity.
However, our love of water brings with it risks that can be fatal.
In 2014-15, 271 people drowned in Australian waterways.
There is considerable evidence that providing young children with training in swimming and water safety significantly reduces this risk.
This is backed by evidence that children aged 5 to 14 are, of all age groups, the least likely to drown due to the acquisition of water safety skills and knowledge at school.
Sadly, Australia has no national approach to swimming and water safety education.
In many cases, the level of water safety education a child receives is dependent on where they live or their parents’ income.
In some States and Territories there is no swimming or water safety program in schools, while in others, it is an essential part of the school curriculum.
This inequity is even greater for Indigenous children, who are less likely to achieve identified benchmarks for water safety competence compared to non-Indigenous students.
This is also the case for children not born in Australia.
Labor’s plan for a national approach to water safety will address this inequity and ensure that all primary school children, regardless of where they live, who their parents are, or where they go to school, will receive water safety training.
POSITIVE POLICY
Counting the Cost: Veterans’ Homelessness and Suicide
Labor recognises that mental health issues arising from active service, including as post-traumatic stress disorder, have affected veterans from all conflicts.
We encourage and support measures designed to ensure that existing programs take account of the mental health requirements of veterans.
A Shorten Labor will fund a comprehensive study into veterans’ homelessness, in addition to establishing an ‘ADF Flag’ for minimum data sets on homelessness and suicide.
A Study into Veterans’ Homelessness
Approximately 10 per cent of Australian’s experiencing homelessness are from the veteran community—a shocking statistic.
Yet there is no comprehensive system to collect data that would allow the Department of Veterans’ Affairs, ex-service organisations and frontline homelessness services to identify, connect and support veterans experiencing homelessness.
To redress this, a Shorten Labor Government will fund a comprehensive study into veterans’ homelessness to identify members of the veteran community who are experiencing or at risk of homelessness.
A Minimum Data Set On Homelessness and Suicide
As part of its mental health policy, Labor has committed to working with States and Territories to build an accurate picture of deaths by suicide and suicide attempts and agree to a national minimum data set for suicide prevention.
As part of this initiative, Labor will ensure the inclusion of an ‘ADF flag’ within this data set, to allow governments to identify if an individual had previously served in the ADF or was a partner or child of an individual who served in the ADF.
The inclusion of an ADF flag would ensure that data can be disaggregated by ADF service and an ongoing record of veterans’ suicide could be maintained, regardless of whether that death is the subject of a DVA dependant compensation claim.
As noted above, there is currently no comprehensive system to collect data that allows governments and service providers to identify homeless veterans.
To address this information gap, Labor will work with States and Territories to include an ‘ADF flag’ within the existing Specialist Homelessness Service Collection (SHSC) which accumulates data from frontline homelessness services based on a national minimum data set.
This will ensure that governments and frontline services providers are able to access an accurate picture of the level of veterans’ homelessness and their needs, including how they use services.
This will support future policy development and better targeting of existing veterans’ support and services, as well as providing a benchmark against which homelessness prevention initiatives can be assessed and help avoid duplication of services.
POSITIVE POLICY
Committing to Family Violence Services
A Shorten Labor Government will provide funding certainty to the organisations delivering the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.
Labor’s commitment of $65 million over six years will ensure 1800 RESPECT, Our WATCh and Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety (ANROWS) can continue their critical work in tackling the scourge of family violence.
These organisations provide critical frontline support services to women experiencing family violence and help drive cultural change.
In Australia today, one in three women has experienced physical violence since the age of 15.
A woman dies at the hands of a current or former partner almost every week.
These are shameful statistics, and ending the scourge of family violence will be a key priority of a Shorten Labor Government.
This funding commitment locks in support for these organisations to 2021–22, giving them certainty over the life of the National Plan.
In Government, Labor delivered the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children to provide a comprehensive approach to the prevention of violence against women and to improve coordination between Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments.
The implementation of the National Plan was always going to result in more women seeking support and it is critical that these services can continue to support women as demand increases.
We will ensure that the funding goes directly to frontline services providers, meaning victims of abuse can speak directly to qualified professionals as quickly as possible.
In addition to providing frontline services, Australia needs to continue to build our evidence base, so that we get the best insights into how to reduce and ultimately eliminate violence against women.
Labor’s commitment will allow ANROWS to continue to improve the knowledge about the causes, consequences and factors of family violence, and how we can prevent it.
We also need to keep working towards stopping violence before it occurs.
To achieve this, we need cultural change.
That is why advocacy organisations like Our WATCh are so important—to build awareness and help create a society where violence is not tolerated.
This package builds on Labor’s earlier commitment to deliver more than $70 million over three years in targeted funding to ensure those suffering from family violence can access critical services, and to make domestic violence leave a universal right.
If elected, Labor will work alongside these organisations to ensure women and children are free to live safe from violence.
Financial Implications
Labor will commit an additional $65.7 million over six years, a cost of $40.1 million over the forward estimates.
POSITIVE POLICY
Fighting Discrimination Against LGBTI Australians
Every Australian has the right to live their life free from discrimination.
But for many lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex Australians, discrimination remains an all-too-familiar part of life.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will appoint a full-time LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner to the Australian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), to ensure the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex Australians are protected, and they are free to live their lives without discrimination.
Labor’s LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner will be a new champion for the rights of LGBTI Australians, and help build a more inclusive Australia.
The fight against discrimination continues
While much progress has been made in the fight for a fairer Australia for LGBTI Australians, that fight is far from over.
Unfortunately, LGBTI Australians continue to face discrimination in many areas of their life.
A significant number of LGBTI Australians report hiding their sexuality or gender identity in a range of situations for fear of violence or discrimination.
LGBTI Australians also continue to face a range of challenges in accessing government services as well as public participation in sport.
We also know that LGBTI people, particularly young people, suffer from a range of mental health issues.
In its Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Intersex Rights report HYPERLINK "http://www.100positivepolicies.org.au/fighting_discrimination_against_lgbti_australians" \l "_ftn1" [1] last year, the AHRC noted: Research suggests that the rate of suicide for LGBT people is 3.5 to 14 times higher than the general population.
LGBT people are also at a higher risk for a range of mental diagnoses.
LGBT people are significantly more likely to be diagnosed with depression or anxiety.
In 2013, the former Labor Government amended the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 so that the Act would cover discrimination on the grounds of sexuality and gender diverse discrimination.
However, until now, these issues have been investigated by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner.
A New Champion for LBGTI Human Rights
Labor will appoint a permanent, dedicated full-time LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner, to ensure that the rights of LGBTI Australians have a new champion, and lesbian, gay, transgender and intersex Australians can feel safer, more secure and more included in Australian society.
Whilst Labor understands that this will not put an end to the discrimination experienced by many LGBTI Australians, having a dedicated discrimination commissioner is an important next step in the fight for a more equal Australia.
POSITIVE POLICY
Creative industries, creative country
Labor believes the creative industries are central to our lives as Australians.
The visual arts, film, music, theatre and dance chronicle our Australian stories while creating jobs across our cities and regions.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government has delivered nothing but chaos and cuts for the arts.
Labor has a plan to fix the damage and restore our creative industries to their rightful place at the centre of Australia’s cultural and economic life.
From Gough Whitlam’s establishment of the Australia Council to the Gillard Government’s wide-ranging Creative Australia policy, Labor has valued and elevated the contribution of the creative industries to Australia’s social, cultural and economic life.
Our comprehensive plan for the arts will see this sector flourish, reaching out to touch the lives of all Australians.
POSITIVE POLICY
Supporting Indigenous Justice
Labor understand the importance of legal assistance services in providing access to justice for all Australians, and has always supported these vital services.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services (ATSILS) operate in every State and Territory to deliver culturally appropriate front line legal services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in need.
Consistent with Labor’s long-standing commitment to ensure access to justice for all Australians, Labor will ensure that the ATSILS are able to carry out their vital role by committing approximately $24 million to the ATSILS over three years, comprising:
$18.18 million to completely reverse the devastating funding shortfalls imposed by the Abbott-Turnbull Government;
$3.6 million to boost the ATSILS capacity to deal specifically with the scourge of family violence, as part of Labor’s Family Violence Package;
$2.25 million to build capacity in National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services (NATSILS), the peak national representative body for the ATSILS.
For over forty years, the ATSILS have delivered legal assistance, community legal education, advocacy, law reform advocacy and prisoner through-care to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in contact with the justice system.
However, significant cuts to the eight ATSILS by the Abbott-Turnbull Government are undermining the capacity of the ATSILS to provide their vital services to vulnerable Indigenous Australians and communities in desperate need.
Labor recognises that the ATSILS must be properly resourced to fulfil their critical role for Indigenous Australians. For example: Today, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are twice as likely to be in custody than in higher education.
In 1991, at the time of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples were 7 times more likely to be in prison.
Despite ongoing efforts to improve this appalling statistic, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) ‘Prisoners in Australia’ data, in 2015 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples were 15.5 times more likely to be incarcerated than other Australians.
ABS statistics also reveal that since 2004 there has been an 88 per cent increase in the rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders imprisoned, while the non-Indigenous rate has risen by 28 per cent.
The provision of expert, culturally appropriate legal assistance is often critical to ensuring that Indigenous Australians, particularly younger offenders, are not drawn into the downward cycle that often commences with a prison sentence for a relatively minor offence.
With respect to the scourge of family violence, which affects all communities, it is deplorable that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women are 34 times more likely to be hospitalised as a result of injuries caused by assault than non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women.
Again, access to legal support may be critically important to survivors of family violence.
Cuts to legal assistance services are a hallmark of Senator Brandis’ disgraceful tenure as Attorney-General under the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
To add insult to injury, despite having responsibility for the ATSILS as the Attorney-General, Senator Brandis has refused every invitation to meet with the executive officers of the NATSILS throughout his entire term of office.
NATSILS report that if unaddressed, the impending funding cuts to the ATSILS imposed by the Abbott-Turnbull Government will: Significantly impact on the capacity of the ATSILS to deliver front line legal services, particularly as budgets have already been cut significantly.
Require the ATSILS to reduce staffing numbers not only for 2017-18, but also going forward into 2018-19 and 2019-20.
Result in an unavoidable withdrawal of frontline services resulting in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples being unrepresented in courts and unable to access culturally competent legal services.
Have unintended costs and put more pressure on the courts, the health sector, corrections services and in this way increase costs to the Federal Government.
Deny many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples the access to justice and procedural fairness that all Australian citizens deserve.
A Shorten Labor Government will not let this happen.
POSITIVE POLICY
Committing to Community Radio
Australian communities will continue to enjoy independent community digital radio, with a Shorten Labor Government committed to restoring much-needed funding to these services.
Community radio is the independent voice of our communities.
More than five million people have access to community radio, with a broad reach not only in our cities, but in rural and regional Australia.
Community radio plays a particularly significant role for Indigenous, print handicapped, ethnic and religious communities.
Unfortunately, Malcolm Turnbull’s approach to community radio is just another example of him saying one thing, and doing another.
As Minister for Communications, Malcom Turnbull said he supported community digital radio. In his first Budget as Prime Minister, he cut $5.6 million from it.
According to the Community Broadcasting Association of Australia, 37 community digital radio services are facing closure altogether from 1 July 2016.
Labor knows these services are a valued part of Australian culture, and we will restore funding to ensure continued delivery of community digital radio services in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, and Adelaide.
This $5.6 million commitment over four years – $1.4 million per annum – will assist with digital platform and infrastructure costs including data connectivity, linking, multiplexing and transmission.
Labor introduced digital radio in Australia and we have a strong track record of supporting community broadcasting.
Independent radio voices should not disappear from our communities — Labor’s support will make sure community broadcasting continues to thrive.
POSITIVE POLICY
Giving Women’s Sport The Attention It Deserves
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver to the ABC the resources it needs to boost coverage of women’s sport, giving our female sports stars the recognition they so obviously deserve.
Australia’s female athletes have given our country some of its greatest sporting glories in recent years – including victories for the Diamonds at the Netball World Cup in 2015, the Southern Stars at the Ashes in 2015, and the Matildas at the Asian Cup in 2010.
The Matildas will also be representing Australia at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics this year, for the first time since 2004.
Yet in 2014 the Australian Sports Commission found that television coverage dedicated to women’s sport was only 7 per cent of all broadcast sports hours.
This is not good enough.
Better television coverage is the first step toward giving our female athletes equal recognition with their male counterparts.
Without it, sportswomen will continue to face barriers to equality in pay, corporate sponsorship and fan support.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government’s savage cuts to the national broadcaster made the problem worse, contributing to the ABC’s decision to cut its regular broadcasts of women’s sport including the Women’s National Basketball League (WNBL).
The $21 million in funding Labor will provide to the ABC will increase coverage of women’s sport on both television and digital platforms by approximately 500 live hours over the next four years.
It is anticipated that the funding will be used to acquire the rights to female sporting competitions that are currently under-represented and where commercial broadcasters have decided not to pursue these rights.
These may include:  The ICC Women’s Cricket World Cup.
The Women’s Hockey World Cup and Champions Trophy.
The FIBA Women’s Basketball World Cup and the WNBL.
The AFC Women’s Asian Cup.
The funds may also be used by the ABC to develop a dedicated women’s sport space on its digital platform iView, covering international women’s teams like the Southern Stars, Opals, Matildas, Diamonds and the Hockeyroos.
This month’s announcement of a landmark deal between Channel 9, Telstra and Netball Australia is a fantastic step in the right direction and shows that the time for greater recognition of Australian sportswomen has finally come.
Today’s announcement is part of Labor’s long-standing commitment to women in sport.
The previous Labor Government invested in female athletes through the Australian Sports Commission; supported the appointment of women to leadership positions on sports boards and governing bodies; and funded a $1.45 million Women in Sports media grant program.
Mr Turnbull broke a promise to the Australian people and slashed more than $250 million from the ABC.
Only Labor will ensure our national broadcaster has the funds necessary to boost women’s sport.
POSITIVE POLICY
A Strong, Vibrant and Sustainable Community Sector
A Shorten Labor Government will reset the Commonwealth’s relationship with the community and not-for-profit sector and usher in a new era of meaningful partnership for positive social change.
Labor understands the critical role played by Australia’s community and not-for-profit sector in building the capacity of individuals and communities, strengthening community cohesion, addressing inequality and harnessing opportunity.
We know that government alone cannot solve all our social problems.
Only by working in partnership with community organisations – and communities themselves – can we bring about lasting change.
But for three years, the Liberals have treated the community and not-for-profit sector with contempt.
First the Liberals ripped more than $270 million worth of funding from frontline services.
They stripped peak advocacy organisations of their funding and slashed money from community legal centres and family violence services.
Then they completely botched their community grants process – pitching community organisations against one another and leaving many frontline services without funding certainty.
As a result, some frontline services have had to cut staff or reduce their services.
Some have closed entirely.
The Liberals also tried to scrap the Australian Charities and Not-For-Profit Commission – only to be fought off by a relentless campaign by Labor and representatives of the community sector.
It’s time to change the way that government works with the community sector.
That is why, a Shorten Labor Government will draw a line in the sand and embark on a new agenda of partnership with community and non-for-profit organisations.
Unlike the Liberals, Labor believes that Government and the Community Sector should work together to develop quality policy, to implement that policy and ensure it delivers real outcomes for vulnerable Australians.
Labor has already established a Federal Labor Community Sector Partnership – a regular forum for debating policy ideas and direction.
If elected, Labor will make the Community Sector Partnership a permanent interface between Government and the community sector.
Labor will also: Reinvigorate the National Compact with the Third Sector – to outline the terms of engagement and agree a joint agenda for working together.
Scrap the Liberal’s shambolic community grants program.
This has been a disaster for community organisations and should not be allowed to continue.
Whilst Labor will honour all existing contracts, over time we will move towards a fairer approach to funding community organisations, including longer term contracts.
Continue to work through the ACNC to streamline reporting mechanisms and cut red tape for community and not-for-profit organisations.
In addition, Labor will work with the community and not-for-profit sectors in the development of Labor’s national information policy, to ensure that the power of open data is available to assist the community sector to do its job more effectively.
We will continue to support community organisations through the volunteer grants program.
We know that community organisations often rely on these small grants to assist them to attract and keep volunteers. Labor will provide a further $10 million toward this important program.
Labor also understands that – particularly as the NDIS and Living Longer Living Better Aged Care Reforms roll out around the country - casualisation insecure work ae of great concerns to many employees.
Labor will work with the community and not-for-profit sector to protect the wages and conditions of employees as these reforms roll out around the country.
POSITIVE POLICY
Jobs Plan For People With Disability
Australia has one of the lowest rates of employment for people with disability in the developed world.
Australia is currently ranked 21st out of 29 countries in employment rates for people with disability.
Labor believes that people with disability deserve the same opportunities as any other Australian to participate in our economy.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme – designed and delivered by Labor – is giving more individual support to people with disability so they have access to employment opportunities.
But the NDIS is just one part of the solution.
As well as delivering the National Disability Insurance Scheme, a Shorten Labor Government will deliver three concrete actions in our first term to boost job opportunities for people with disability.
Labor’s jobs plan for Australians with disability will encourage business and community organisations to employ more Australians living with disability, trial reforms to Disability Employment Services so there is more choice and control, and ensure more people with disability can work in the public service.
Disability Employment Action Plans
Labor will support businesses and not-for-profit organisations to develop their own Disability Employment Action Plans.
These Action Plans will allow organisations to: Identify existing barriers to employment for people with disability in their workplace.
Improve recruitment policies and procedures so they are more inclusive.
Outline specific strategies and targets to boost employment and training opportunities for people with disability within their organisation.
Businesses will continue to be supported by the Employment Assistance Fund, which helps fund workplace modifications so that people with disability can succeed at work.
Labor will provide $1 million to an independent, national not-for-profit disability organisation so they can promote, advise and coordinate the development and delivery of Disability Employment Actions Plans.
The successful organisation will be selected from a competitive tender process
Trialing new approaches to Disability Employment Services
The last Labor Government delivered big changes to employment support services for people with disability.
Since 2010, the number of people with disability receiving employment support has increased by almost 50 per cent and the number of job placements has doubled.
But we know the current system is far from perfect, which is why the next Labor Government will trial further reforms to improve Disability Employment Services.
Labor will ensure changes reflect the core NDIS principles of choice and control.
Labor will investigate new approaches that ‘unbundle’ Disability Employment Services funding so that participants have more control over the services they receive.
This means jobseekers will be able to control their own funding, and choose different service providers to provide different employment supports, depending on their individual needs.
It will mean greater choice for participants, and encourage more competition and innovation in the sector.
Labor will also invest $5 million to trial a new approach to better integrate Disability Employment Services and the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
In selected NDIS locations, people with disability looking for work will be able choose their own employment supports as part of their individual plan.
This means they can access a range of employment assistance from different service providers, depending on their individual needs.
The size and scope of these trials will be informed by consultations with service providers, the National Disability Insurance Agency and local communities.
Public sector employment targets for people with disability
Labor recognises that if we want more businesses and organisations to employ Australians with disability, we must first lead by example.
A Shorten Labor Government will task the Australian Public Service Commission with developing a series of employment targets for people with disability, in partnership with different departments and agencies and in consultation with disability advocates.
The employment targets will be national, department and agency-specific, and will include targets for leadership positions.
Commonwealth departments and agencies will also be expected to develop or update Disability Employment Action Plans to make sure these targets are met.
In this way, Labor will act as we expect others to act – providing opportunities for people with disability to succeed at work.
Labor’s jobs plan for people with disability has been costed by the independent Parliamentary Budget Office.
POSITIVE POLICY
Working Futures: Tackling Youth Unemployment
Australia’s youth unemployment rate has been too high for too long.
Today, more than 262,000 people aged between 15 and 24 are out of work – a little less than one in three Australian jobseekers.
We must do better to stop these young people falling through the cracks and steer them into a secure future instead.
Labor’s Working Futures plan will get more young people into work – and keep them there – by giving them real skills and real opportunities.
Unlike the Turnbull Government’s flawed internships scheme, Working Futures will offer real work experience and fair pay, along with the chance to achieve a proper qualification.
Labor’s Working Futures program will focus on the young people who are finding it hardest to break into the jobs market.
Each year, we will support 20,000 people aged between 15 and 24 through a comprehensive work and training program that sets them on track for a life in work.
As part of Working Futures, jobseekers will take part in:  A six-week work readiness course focusing on essential employment skills as well as personal presentation, interview techniques and job hunting.
A six-month work placement with an employer, paid at an award-equivalent training wage.
A fully-funded Certificate III in a subject of their choice.
Working Futures aims to stop young people getting trapped in unemployment as they get older by tackling the specific barriers that keep them out of work.
Unlike the Turnbull Government’s flawed youth internship program, we will give young jobseekers real skills and real experience for a successful future in work.
POSITIVE POLICY
A National Affordable Housing Strategy
A Shorten Labor Government will provide the national leadership required to address housing affordability and homelessness.
At a time when the number of people experiencing housing stress is rising and the rates of homelessness remain high, we cannot continue to stand by and adopt a business as usual approach.
A Shorten Labor Government will develop a national affordable housing strategy to drive the development of an agreed, coordinated approach to addressing housing affordability in Australia.
A Shorten Labor Government will: Appoint a Minister for Housing and Homelessness.
Make housing affordability a standing item on the COAG agenda.
Include a more comprehensive coverage of housing as part of the Closing the Gap report.
Develop an Affordable Housing Industry Plan to ensure the long-term development of a sustainable affordable housing sector.
Re-establish the National Housing Supply Council.
Investigate the development of national rental standards.
A Shorten Labor Government, in partnership with State and Territories, will: Aim to halve homelessness by 2025.
Agree on national targets to increase the supply of affordable housing dwellings.
Report annually through COAG on progress towards the targets.
Labor wants to work with homelessness services to deliver long-term certainty for the sector and will begin this important work by immediately hosting a national roundtable on homelessness and a meeting of State and Territory Housing and Homelessness Ministers.
A Shorten Labor Government will also provide $88 million over two years for a new Safe Housing program, to improve transitional housing options for women and children escaping domestic and family violence.
From 1 July 2017, Labor will limit negative gearing to new property.
This is a significant policy that will provide an incentive for new construction and add thousands of jobs to the building industry.
Labor is committed to improving fairness, particularly for first home buyers, and will fully grandfather and preserve the tax offsets that are currently available to existing property owners.
Too often discussions on affordable housing concentrate on home ownership – yet over 30 per cent of all households are renters.
Labor will ensure that the needs of renting households are considered within the national strategy on affordable housing.
A Shorten Labor Government will work with the States and Territories to reach agreement on a set of national minimum rental standards.
Labor will commission work to examine:  Rental contract lengths.
Fair processes where landlords seek termination.
Ways to provide greater freedom of choice for tenants.
A Shorten Labor Government will also provide a one-off establishment grant of $3 million to Homes4homes (H4H) a social enterprise by The Big Issue, looking to raise capital funds to invest into affordable housing supply.
POSITIVE POLICY
Increasing Efforts To Prevent And Address Family Violence
A Shorten Labor Government will give the issue of family violence national prominence, with the Prime Minister to deliver an annual Family Violence Statement to Parliament.
This is part of Labor’s latest measures aimed at ending the scourge of family violence in our community.
Eliminating family violence must be a national priority – it will be one of the most important priorities of a Shorten Labor Government.
While Australia has made good progress – there is much more that must be done.
That’s why Labor is announcing further measures aimed at ending the scourge of family violence in our community: An annual statement to the Parliament on progress in eliminating family and domestic violence.
A commitment to responding to the recommendations of the Final Report of the COAG Advisory Panel on Reducing Violence Against Women and their Children, and the recommendations of the Victorian Royal Commission into Family Violence, within a year of taking office.
The appointment of additional Federal Circuit Court judges to Brisbane and Parramatta; to appoint a permanent Federal Circuit Court judge to Wollongong; and to appoint an additional Family Court judge to Brisbane.
$43.2 million over four years to avoid re-traumatisation of victims and survivors from being cross-examined by alleged perpetrators personally – and instead providing for both parties to be legally represented.
A commitment to prohibit non-consensual sharing of private sexual images and recordings, within the first 100 days of a Shorten Labor Government.
A commitment to working within COAG to create specific offences prohibiting the covert installation of spying apps on smartphones.
$3.6 million for pilot programs in relation to family and domestic violence in culturally and linguistically diverse communities.
Protection for people on temporary visas facing family and domestic violence by creating a new type of temporary visa, which will remove impediments to women leaving their partners, and carry work rights so that women leaving violent relationships can seek to support themselves.
These measures build on Labor’s earlier significant commitments to stopping family and domestic violence, including measures such as critical funding for frontline legal services, transitional housing options for women and children escaping family and domestic violence, and hosting a National Crisis Summit within our first 100 days of office.
A Shorten Labor Government will work to ensure women and children are free to live safe from violence – today’s announcements build on our commitment to eliminate family violence in all forms.
POSITIVE POLICY
Champion The March To Gender Equality
Equality for the women of Australia will be a national priority for a Shorten Labor Government.
Central to our plan is Labor’s commitment to safe housing for women and children escaping domestic and family violence, which is a major cause of homelessness in Australia.
Family violence is a crisis which requires more than a change in attitudes.
It is a national disgrace that demands a national approach.
Over one third of people who accessed specialist homelessness services over the three years to 2013-14 were seeking assistance due to domestic and family violence.
The majority of those were women - 110,000 women compared to 12,000 men– and more than 45,000 of this group were women with children.
Many more women want to leave an abusive relationship, but cannot.
Or do leave, only to return because they have nowhere else to go.
This has to change.
Labor will invest $88 million over two years in a new Safe Housing program, to improve transitional housing options for women and children escaping domestic and family violence by filling the gap between crisis housing and longer term arrangements.
The Safe Housing program will increase the number of dwellings specifically available for women and children fleeing domestic violence and will provide funding for support programs that help women to stay safe in their own homes.
This commitment builds on Labor’s announcement in 2015 of an initial $15 million investment in Safe at Home grants to help people affected by family violence stay safe in their own home.
Through strong government leadership, Labor’s positive plan for gender equality will also focus on: Ending the scourge of family violence.
Women’s health.
Support managing work and care.
Equal Opportunity in education.
Gender Pay Equity.
Making retirement incomes fairer.
Advancing women’s wellbeing at home and abroad.
Promoting women’s sport.
Ensuring equality for women in Australia through full, fair and equal access to opportunities in the workforce, leadership and education, is both a social issue and economic issue - a test of our national character and vital building block for national prosperity.
The latest data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics shows that the pay gap is still too high at 17.3 per cent.
Australian women are now earning on average $277.70 per week less than men and have an average of $90,000 less in superannuation.
The G20 has acknowledged that one of the world’s most significant barriers to global economic growth is the persistently low level of women’s participation in the workforce compared with men.
Labor knows that increasing women’s participation and economic security requires action from all parts of the community and there is no area of Australian life, no sector of Australian community, that does not and will not benefit from the full and equal inclusion of women.
The march of women through the institutions of power will define the decade ahead. It is our responsibility to speed this advance, to offer all our daughters and our nation a more prosperous, more equal future.
Labor will provide the genuine leadership and the real resources to deliver equality of opportunity for the women of Australia.
POSITIVE POLICY
Safe Housing For Women
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $88 million over two years in a new Safe Housing program to increase transitional housing options for women and children escaping domestic and family violence and to support programs that enable women to stay safe in their own homes.
One of the most common reasons why women remain in violent relationships is the lack of housing options available if they leave.
Safe Housing projects will support women and children escaping domestic and family violence by providing: Funding to construct or purchase accommodation used to provide short term or transitional housing options at affordable rents with flexible bond arrangements.
Funding for homelessness prevention initiatives which support women and children to remain safely in their own homes.
Labor’s Safe Housing program will provide funding to construct or purchase accommodation used to provide short term or transitional affordable housing options for women and children.
It will support a range of housing options including single or multiunit developments, new builds or existing dwellings.
It will support projects which complement existing domestic and family violence services that provide ongoing support to women including access to financial counselling and legal services.
Labor’s Safe Housing program will also provide funding for initiatives that increase the safety of women and children in their own homes.
States and Territories will be able to bid for funding through a competitive process.
To leverage more funding for the program, the States and Territories will be required to match the federal funding.
Community housing providers, in partnership with specialist domestic violence services, will also be able to submit an application for funding as long as the project has a valid business case which meets the objectives of the program.
Australia’s place in a changing world
Australia seeks a good international society. Our national interest is in a peaceful, stable and prosperous world.
There are many challenges to this global vision – including the threat of conflict between states, the rise of non-state actors, growing economic inequality, and climate change.
We acknowledge our leading role in our region and accept our global responsibilities.
POSITIVE POLICY
Defence Under Labor: A Safe, Secure and Independent Australia
A Shorten Labor Government will keep Australia safe and prosperous while protecting our values and unique way of life.
This should always be the primary obligation of any government.
Labor will continue to adopt a constructive and bipartisan approach to Australia’s national security, because there is no place for political partisanship when it comes to the safety and security of our nation and our fellow Australians.
Labor acknowledges the pivotal role that the Australian Defence Force (ADF) plays in defending Australia and our national interests.
We also acknowledge the critical role that Australian defence industry plays in supporting and equipping our defence personnel.
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure Australia retains a world-class defence force and innovative defence industry by:
Implementing the funding goals of the 2016 Defence White Paper, including raising Defence funding to 2 per cent of GDP by 202021.
Building 12 Future Submarines in South Australia, and mandating that at least 70 per cent of the work is done in Australia.
Maintaining Australia’s strategically vital naval shipbuilding industry by implementing a continuous build of surface warships and ending the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s practice of denying local shipyards the opportunity to compete for work.
Continuing to strengthen defence cooperation with the United States, including by redressing the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s neglect of the US Force Posture Initiatives in Australia’s north.
Reforming the means by which ADF pay and conditions are determined and putting an end to the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cynical attempts to cut the pay and conditions of ADF personnel.
Establishing an intergovernmental taskforce to develop a nationally consistent approach to perfluorinated chemical contamination at Defence and Commonwealth sites.
POSITIVE POLICY
Generating Jobs Through Trade And Investment
A Shorten Labor Government will pursue trade and investment policies that support Australian jobs and living standards by opening up new markets, driving exports into those markets, and attracting new investment.
Labor understands that as the Australian economy transitions out of the mining boom we need to find other sources of growth and jobs.
We need to realise the export potential of sophisticated Australian services industries such as education, tourism, and financial and professional services.
We want to see our advanced manufacturing firms access the global value chains that are reshaping international production.
And our farmers and food processors supplying more high-value Australian food to the rapidly growing countries of Asia.
A Shorten Labor Government will negotiate high-quality international trade agreements that open up new export markets by reducing tariffs, quotas and “behind the border” barriers to trade.
We will do so while maintaining Australia’s right to adopt sound public policies in areas such as health care, ,.
environmental protection
fair working conditions and job opportunities for Australian workers
POSITIVE POLICY
Respecting And Supporting Our Veterans
A Shorten Labor Government will strengthen support for our valued veteran community.
Labor believes in the robust provision of entitlements, services and support to our veterans and their families as a sincere gesture of thanks for the service and sacrifice they have provided our nation.
Australia has a good record of looking after our veterans, it does not have a perfect one.
Labor has listened to the veterans’ community, and recognises that more needs to be done.
Our veterans’ policy needs be structured to respond to the differing needs of veterans according to their stage of life, with flexible programs based on meeting contemporary needs.
In addition to the specific programs outlined below, more information on Labor’s veterans’ policy is available here.
A First Principles Review of Veterans’ Affairs
When grave concerns are raised about the administration, governance and processes within Veterans’ Affairs, we must act.
Serious instances of processing delays, disclosure of veterans’ private information, overpayment of entitlements and continued high levels of complaints have undermined the veteran community’s confidence in the delivery of government services.
A Shorten Labor Government will commission a First Principles Review of Veterans’ Affairs and the delivery of government services.
This end-to-end holistic review will be based on the outcomes required of the Department and focused on agreed upon first-principles.
A first principles review will: Rectify administrative, governance and process failings.
Ensure government services are structured in a way that allows them to meet existing and future challenges efficiently.
Secure the trust of the veterans’ community.
This is not an attack on DVA employees, or their commitment to the important work they do.
This is about putting people first.
This is about making sure the systems we have in place work for the people they are meant to serve.
This is about making sure the foundations of our veterans’ affairs system is strong.
More information on this policy is available here.
The Australian National Veterans Arts Centre in Melbourne
In addition, a Shorten Labor Government will establish the Australian National Veterans Arts Centre (ANVAC) at 310 St Kilda Road in Melbourne.
Currently derelict, the St Kilda Road facility was formerly a repatriation centre used by World War I veterans as the Repatriation Commission Outpatient Clinic.
The building will be remediated and restored by the Department of Defence, before being returned to its original purpose as a centre caring for veterans.
The facility is superbly located for this purpose, being proximate to the Shrine of Remembrance, Victoria Barracks, public transport links and the Melbourne CBD.
ANVAC will host programs and initiatives for a new generation of veterans seeking support for mental health and PTSD, including through arts therapy.
Veterans have long engaged in the arts for a range of reasons including for rehabilitation from wounds, injury or illness, or as a form of therapy to capture their lived experience and to stimulate morale within peer groups.
More information on Labor’s plan for the Australian National Veterans Arts Centre is available here.
Counting the cost: Veterans’ suicide and homelessness
The rate of veteran suicide and homelessness, and the way in which it is recorded, continues to raise significant concerns within the veterans’ community and the general public more broadly.
The lack of comprehensive data or the ‘under-reporting’ of veterans’ suicide has been of particular concern.
As part of its mental health policy, Labor has committed to working with the States and Territories to build an accurate picture of deaths by suicide and suicide attempts and agree to a national minimum data set for suicide prevention.
As part of this initiative, Labor will ensure the inclusion of an ‘ADF flag’ within this data set, to allow governments to identify if an individual had previously served in the ADF or was a partner or child of an individual who served in the ADF.
Labor will also work with the States and Territories to include an ‘ADF flag’ within the existing Specialist Homelessness Service Collection.
In addition, Labor will fund a comprehensive study into veterans’ homelessness to identify members of the veteran community who are experiencing or at risk of homelessness.
The study will make recommendations to address factors that increase the risk of homelessness and solutions on how to better connect homeless veterans with appropriate support services.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Regional And Global Efforts
According the UNHCR, the number of displaced people fleeing from war, conflict or persecution is now at its highest level since World War II.
The forced displacement of people around the globe is currently at unprecedented levels.
By the close of 2015 an estimated 60 million individuals were forcibly displaced globally by persecution, conflict, violence and human rights violations.
This is equivalent to one person in every 122 on the planet being displaced by violence and war.
Labor believes that Australia can do more to address this global humanitarian crisis.
We believe in a compassionate approach to asylum seekers that enables refugees to progress their claims safely and securely.
Labor has a plan to work in our region and with international humanitarian agencies to tackle this crisis while maintaining the integrity of Australia’s borders.
First and foremost, a Shorten Labor Government will provide significantly increased annual funding to the UNHCR for its global work program and its work in South East Asia and the Pacific.
At a time when the global humanitarian need is greater than ever, Labor will provide $450 million over three years to support the important work of the UNHCR.
This funding commitment will place Australia in the top 5 of global contributors to the UNHCR.
Labor will also reinstate references to the UN Refugees Convention in the Migration Act to reverse the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s retrograde efforts to undermine international law.
Furthermore, we will take a leadership role within South East Asia and the Pacific to build a regional humanitarian framework to improve the situation of asylum seekers.
This would include supporting the UNHCR in providing health and education services to asylum seekers.
It would also involve advocating for work rights for asylum seekers, similar to what would have been achieved under the proposed Malaysia Agreement in 2011.
Labor believes Australia has a role to play as a responsible global citizen in responding to the current humanitarian crisis.
We will not shirk this responsibility as the Abbott-Turnbull Government has consistently sought to do. Instead, we will work in our region and with international agencies to progress refugees’ claims safely, securely and responsibly.
POSITIVE POLICY
Protecting Overseas Aid Projects
A Shorten Labor Government will act immediately to save projects facing closure due to the Liberals’ cuts to overseas aid.
Because of a $224 million cut to overseas aid in the Liberals’ last Budget, critical projects like maternal and child health, schooling, clean water, and sanitation, risk being axed from 30 June this year.
Today, Labor commits that if elected, we will reverse the $224 million cut – to keep these projects going in 2016-17.
Since coming to Government in 2013, the Liberals have gutted Australia’s aid program.
It is now the weakest in history.
Sadly, the Liberals’ cuts have been so deep that it is impossible to fix the aid program quickly.
Labor’s commitments are designed to help start rebuilding Australia’s aid program.
In addition to today’s $224 million announcement, Labor will: Provide $450 million, over three years, to support the important work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, placing Australia in the top five global contributors.
Invest an extra $40 million a year, from 2017-18, to help Australian NGOs deliver frontline services to some of the world’s poorest people.
Legislate to restore accountability to Australia’s aid program by reintroducing the annual Ministerial Budget Statement on overseas aid, after it was axed by the Liberals in 2014.
Labor will release the statement at the same time as each federal Budget to show how aid is allocated by sector, country, and region.
Legislate for an independent evaluation of Australia’s aid program, as well as the measurement and reporting of effectiveness.
Over the next four years, Labor will provide around $800 million more for overseas aid than the Liberals.
Labor supports a strong aid program because as a good global citizen Australia has a duty to help reduce poverty and inequality, and respond effectively to humanitarian crises.
Labor supports a strong aid program because it helps keep Australia safe, by working to tackle serious diseases and violence in our region, and in our world.
Labor supports a strong aid program because it benefits Australia’s economy when countries go from being aid recipients to trading partners.
POSITIVE POLICY
Australia’s Submarines Built Here.
Under Labor, Australia’s Future Submarines will be built, maintained and sustained in Australia.
Building and delivering Australia’s new submarine fleet is an inter-generational decision.
Future Prime Ministers, from both sides of politics, will have to live with the decision that is taken.
This is the most significant procurement decision of our time, with construction and maintenance costs going beyond many billions of dollars over the life of the project – it is vital that we get it right.
For strategic defence reasons it is critical that Australia retains an independent capability to build, sustain and maintain our next fleet of submarines.
It is simply too important for flawed selection processes and partisan politics.
Before the last election, the future construction of Australia’s submarine fleet was bipartisan, with both Liberal and Labor declaring the next generation of submarines would be built in Australia.
Since then, the Liberals have turned the issue of Australia’s submarine build into a political football and refused to guarantee they will deliver on that promise.
And while a preferred bidder – DCNS – has been announced, contracts are not yet signed.
Only Labor has been clear and consistent: we would make it a condition of the contract that the successful tenderer build Australia’s Future Submarines in Australia.
This will ensure Australia secures a future submarine fleet that meets our national defence requirements at the most competitive price for taxpayers
, and grows thousands of good Australian jobs in the process.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Increasing The Humanitarian Intake
Major conflicts in Syria, Iraq and the nations across Africa have seen the number of displaced people fleeing from war, conflict or persecution rise to its highest level since World War II.
The forced displacement of people around the globe is currently at unprecedented levels.
By the close of 2015 an estimated 60 million individuals were forcibly displaced globally by persecution, conflict, violence and human rights violations.
This is equivalent to one person in every 122 on the planet being displaced by violence and war.
Australia is a nation writ large because of migration.
We should never forget the debt we owe to generations of migrants, and refugees, who in seeking a better life have enriched the lives of all Australians.
There can be no doubt that immigration has unreservedly been one of the secrets of Australian success.
We are proud so many of us are Australians by choice.
That is why Labor will increase Australia’s annual humanitarian intake to 27,000 by 2025.
As part of our commitment to demonstrating leadership in our region, a portion of the program will be dedicated to resettling refugees from the region.
This is Labor’s plan to ensure that Australia takes our fair share of refugees.
It is a plan that ensures that Australia steps up and fulfils a greater responsibility as a good global citizen; a nation that is responsible in the world and secure at home.
POSITIVE POLICY
Defending Australia – Future Frigates
Under Labor, Australia’s Future Frigates will be built, maintained and sustained in Australia.
For strategic defence reasons it is critical that Australia retains an independent shipbuilding capability here at home.
Having a truly world class shipbuilding sector will require a commitment to a continuous build program for our Future Frigates to ensure these vessels not only have the best technology at the best price but also maximise efficiency and workforce expertise.
Labor will provide Australian shipbuilders with the certainty they need to make investments and to recruit and retain the highly-skilled workforce needed to build these vital capabilities for Australia’s defence forces.
Expert advice is unequivocal; that anything less than a commitment to build the Future Frigates in Australia will put jobs at risk, along with our capacity to continue to be a world-class naval shipbuilding industry for the long term.
POSITIVE POLICY
Counter Terrorism under Labor
Protecting Australians, Defending Human Rights
There is no greater responsibility of government than to protect the safety and security of its citizens.
Terrorism is an affront to all humanity, and Labor will continue to ensure our nation’s security while upholding the democratic rights and freedoms that Australians have for generations fought to protect.
Proper resourcing and an effective legal framework that gives our security and law enforcement agencies the powers they need to keep us safe are fundamental to Australia’s security environment.
Labor will continue to fully support our agencies in their vital work to protect the safety of all Australians and defend our nation’s security.
Australians expect transparency and accountability in security and enforcement activities to the greatest extent possible, and Labor will continue to champion those safeguard mechanisms.
In ensuring that the rights and freedoms of Australians are protected as well as their physical security, transparency and accountability safeguards also help ensure that Australians have confidence in their security and law enforcement agencies.
This further reinforces our security because maintaining a close relationship with the community they protect helps our security agencies to carry out their vital role.
Bipartisanship
National security is a bipartisan issue.
It should always be above politics, as no individual and no party has a monopoly on patriotism.
A Shorten Labor Government will continue to work in a bipartisan way to ensure our nation’s security.
Throughout the term of the Abbott-Turnbull Government, Labor has worked in a constructive manner through the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security to ensure all proposed national security legislation is fit for purpose.
Following rigorous scrutiny of new laws through the committee process, Labor has achieved significant improvements to national security legislation including the introduction of important safeguards such as the establishment of a Public Interest Advocate in situations where security agencies seek metadata from journalists.
Working in a bipartisan manner, Labor helped to enact over 100 substantive amendments to the national security bills put forward by the Abbott-Turnbull Government, including 26 substantive amendments to the Australian Citizenship Amendment (Allegiance to Australia) Bill 2015.
In each new round of counter terrorism legislation proposed by the Government, Labor has enhanced oversight and transparency.
We have ensured that any new powers are extended for no longer than is necessary, through the application of sunset clauses on some extraordinary powers, and with mandated reviews.
Our focus is about the best interests and safety of Australians.
Our interest is always in striking the right balance between national security considerations and the fundamental democratic rights and freedoms all Australians cherish.
Labor will always be mindful that in seeking to protect ourselves from the terrorist threat, we do not undermine the very foundations of our strength that the terrorists want to destroy.
An Inclusive Approach To National Security
A Shorten Labor Government will pursue a balanced approach to counter terrorism—drawing on new means, new methods and adapting to new challenges.
We put our trust in the expertise, professionalism and skill of our security agencies and emergency services personnel, and we should be guided by their advice.
Labor believes early intervention and community engagement, working in combination with strong and bipartisan counter terrorism legislation, are all key to preventing vulnerable young Australians being groomed into extremist ideology.
As was noted by ASIO director-general Duncan Lewis in mid-2015, “we understand we can’t arrest our way to success. If there is indeed a silver bullet to solving the issue of radicalisation, it is in the area of social cohesion.”
Countering violent extremism programs need appropriate funding, cohesive narratives and they need to provide viable alternatives to disenfranchised young Australians who may be vulnerable to terrorist recruiters.
We must give agencies and communities all the support we can to enhance their capability and to counter the radicalisation of vulnerable youths.
In addition, Labor will build effective partnerships with other countries to respond to common security challenges, including continuing engagement with the United States and Europe, and further strengthening our ties with our Asian and other regional neighbours.
Strong international institutional arrangements should coordinate international responses to security threats.
Labor will respect and uphold these arrangements and actively participate to influence positive outcomes.
Under a Shorten Labor Government, Australia will continue to work directly with regional institutions to strengthen their capacity to deal with terrorist challenges in our region.
Labor’s Record
Labor is proud of our record on national security.
In Government between 2007 and 2013, we increased funding for public order and safety by hundreds of millions of dollars in real terms.
In December 2008, Prime Minister Rudd delivered Australia’s first National Security Statement to Parliament, setting out our national security challenges and a comprehensive approach to responding to those challenges.
Labor also commissioned and built ASIO’s new purpose-designed headquarters, named after Labor Prime Minister Ben Chifley, who in 1949 signed the directive establishing ASIO.
In 2010 Labor published a Counter Terrorism White Paper, which outlined a detailed strategy to combat the threat of terrorism, based on four key elements: Analysis: an intelligence-led response to terrorism, driven by a properly connected and properly informed national security community.
Protection: taking all necessary and practical action to protect Australia and Australians from terrorism at home and abroad.
Response: providing an immediate and targeted response to specific terrorist threats and terrorist attacks should they occur.
Resilience: building a strong and resilient Australian community to resist the development of any form of violent extremism and terrorism on the home front.
The White Paper established a Counter Terrorism Control Centre within the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation to create closer links and bring together expertise from across our security, intelligence and law enforcement agencies and focus Australia’s counter terrorism efforts.
In addition, Federal Labor has improved cooperation between the Australian Federal Police (AFP), ASIO and the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
POSITIVE POLICY
Advancing Australian Multiculturalism
A Shorten Labor Government will renew investment in Australian multiculturalism, with $28.3 million of new funding to support social cohesion and economic inclusion.
A Shorten Labor Government will renew investment in Australian multiculturalism, with $28.3 million of new funding to support social cohesion and economic inclusion.
Investing in new humanitarian migrants means promoting economic opportunity.
We know the ability to speak English is the single most important factor in getting a job.
By funding migrant support properly in the short term, Australia will be better off over the long term.
By ensuring our programs and policies continue to improve, more new migrants can fully participate.
Australia is one of the most diverse societies across the globe.
This was no accident and has been the result of hard work.
We cannot stop now.
Promoting social cohesion and economic inclusion will see the multicultural dividend grow into the future.
In the coming financial year, Australia will see one of the largest humanitarian programs in our history, with over 20,000 new humanitarian migrants expected to arrive and settle in Australia.
Many will be from Syria and Iraq, where people are fleeing persecution.
Labor’s plan will ensure every new humanitarian migrant is given the best possible start to life in Australia.
An Office for Multicultural Affairs will be created in the Australian Public Service to improve coordination, policy development, research and evaluation, and program management.
Labor will invest $11.3 million to fund capital works for settlement and community sector organisations.
For too long, support for new and established migrant communities has occurred without the necessary infrastructure.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government, in one of their first decisions in 2013, slashed the Building Multicultural Communities program.
Even after letters of successful grants had been received by many organisations, overdue projects were snatched away at the last minute.
Labor will also invest in the people who support new and established migrant communities. A funding stream of $7.5 million will help organisations build critical skills in their staff.
From community leadership to volunteer management to bilingual engagement, these skills are vital to support new migrants settle into society and the labour market.
These policies have been informed from the grassroots.
After listening to settlement and multicultural organisations who live and breathe support for new migrants, Labor has the right plan to ensure future citizens are given the support they need.
This investment represents a stark contrast to the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Instead of asking settlement and multicultural organisations to do more with less, as we saw in the Budget, a Labor Government will invest in organisations to help new humanitarian migrants succeed.
POSITIVE POLICY
Water Safe: Labor’s National Water Safety Education Program
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $40.9 million to roll out a national water safety education program to every primary school student in Australia, ensuring all Australian children have the necessary training and skills to be safe around water.
Australians live by the water.
Being in and around water is part of our culture and identity.
However, our love of water brings with it risks that can be fatal.
In 2014-15, 271 people drowned in Australian waterways.
There is considerable evidence that providing young children with training in swimming and water safety significantly reduces this risk.
This is backed by evidence that children aged 5 to 14 are, of all age groups, the least likely to drown due to the acquisition of water safety skills and knowledge at school.
Sadly, Australia has no national approach to swimming and water safety education.
In many cases, the level of water safety education a child receives is dependent on where they live or their parents’ income.
In some States and Territories there is no swimming or water safety program in schools, while in others, it is an essential part of the school curriculum.
This inequity is even greater for Indigenous children, who are less likely to achieve identified benchmarks for water safety competence compared to non-Indigenous students.
This is also the case for children not born in Australia.
Labor’s plan for a national approach to water safety will address this inequity and ensure that all primary school children, regardless of where they live, who their parents are, or where they go to school, will receive water safety training.
POSITIVE POLICY
Counting the Cost: Veterans’ Homelessness and Suicide
Labor recognises that mental health issues arising from active service, including as post-traumatic stress disorder, have affected veterans from all conflicts.
We encourage and support measures designed to ensure that existing programs take account of the mental health requirements of veterans.
A Shorten Labor will fund a comprehensive study into veterans’ homelessness, in addition to establishing an ‘ADF Flag’ for minimum data sets on homelessness and suicide.
A Study into Veterans’ Homelessness
Approximately 10 per cent of Australian’s experiencing homelessness are from the veteran community—a shocking statistic.
Yet there is no comprehensive system to collect data that would allow the Department of Veterans’ Affairs, ex-service organisations and frontline homelessness services to identify, connect and support veterans experiencing homelessness.
To redress this, a Shorten Labor Government will fund a comprehensive study into veterans’ homelessness to identify members of the veteran community who are experiencing or at risk of homelessness.
A Minimum Data Set On Homelessness and Suicide
As part of its mental health policy, Labor has committed to working with States and Territories to build an accurate picture of deaths by suicide and suicide attempts and agree to a national minimum data set for suicide prevention.
As part of this initiative, Labor will ensure the inclusion of an ‘ADF flag’ within this data set, to allow governments to identify if an individual had previously served in the ADF or was a partner or child of an individual who served in the ADF.
The inclusion of an ADF flag would ensure that data can be disaggregated by ADF service and an ongoing record of veterans’ suicide could be maintained, regardless of whether that death is the subject of a DVA dependant compensation claim.
As noted above, there is currently no comprehensive system to collect data that allows governments and service providers to identify homeless veterans.
To address this information gap, Labor will work with States and Territories to include an ‘ADF flag’ within the existing Specialist Homelessness Service Collection (SHSC) which accumulates data from frontline homelessness services based on a national minimum data set.
This will ensure that governments and frontline services providers are able to access an accurate picture of the level of veterans’ homelessness and their needs, including how they use services.
This will support future policy development and better targeting of existing veterans’ support and services, as well as providing a benchmark against which homelessness prevention initiatives can be assessed and help avoid duplication of services.
POSITIVE POLICY
Committing to Family Violence Services
A Shorten Labor Government will provide funding certainty to the organisations delivering the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.
Labor’s commitment of $65 million over six years will ensure 1800 RESPECT, Our WATCh and Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety (ANROWS) can continue their critical work in tackling the scourge of family violence.
These organisations provide critical frontline support services to women experiencing family violence and help drive cultural change.
In Australia today, one in three women has experienced physical violence since the age of 15.
A woman dies at the hands of a current or former partner almost every week.
These are shameful statistics, and ending the scourge of family violence will be a key priority of a Shorten Labor Government.
This funding commitment locks in support for these organisations to 2021–22, giving them certainty over the life of the National Plan.
In Government, Labor delivered the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children to provide a comprehensive approach to the prevention of violence against women and to improve coordination between Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments.
The implementation of the National Plan was always going to result in more women seeking support and it is critical that these services can continue to support women as demand increases.
We will ensure that the funding goes directly to frontline services providers, meaning victims of abuse can speak directly to qualified professionals as quickly as possible.
In addition to providing frontline services, Australia needs to continue to build our evidence base, so that we get the best insights into how to reduce and ultimately eliminate violence against women.
Labor’s commitment will allow ANROWS to continue to improve the knowledge about the causes, consequences and factors of family violence, and how we can prevent it.
We also need to keep working towards stopping violence before it occurs.
To achieve this, we need cultural change.
That is why advocacy organisations like Our WATCh are so important—to build awareness and help create a society where violence is not tolerated.
This package builds on Labor’s earlier commitment to deliver more than $70 million over three years in targeted funding to ensure those suffering from family violence can access critical services, and to make domestic violence leave a universal right.
If elected, Labor will work alongside these organisations to ensure women and children are free to live safe from violence.
Financial Implications
Labor will commit an additional $65.7 million over six years, a cost of $40.1 million over the forward estimates.
POSITIVE POLICY
Fighting Discrimination Against LGBTI Australians
Every Australian has the right to live their life free from discrimination.
But for many lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex Australians, discrimination remains an all-too-familiar part of life.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will appoint a full-time LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner to the Australian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), to ensure the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex Australians are protected, and they are free to live their lives without discrimination.
Labor’s LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner will be a new champion for the rights of LGBTI Australians, and help build a more inclusive Australia.
The fight against discrimination continues
While much progress has been made in the fight for a fairer Australia for LGBTI Australians, that fight is far from over.
Unfortunately, LGBTI Australians continue to face discrimination in many areas of their life.
A significant number of LGBTI Australians report hiding their sexuality or gender identity in a range of situations for fear of violence or discrimination.
LGBTI Australians also continue to face a range of challenges in accessing government services as well as public participation in sport.
We also know that LGBTI people, particularly young people, suffer from a range of mental health issues.
In its Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Intersex Rights report HYPERLINK "http://www.100positivepolicies.org.au/fighting_discrimination_against_lgbti_australians" \l "_ftn1" [1] last year, the AHRC noted: Research suggests that the rate of suicide for LGBT people is 3.5 to 14 times higher than the general population.
LGBT people are also at a higher risk for a range of mental diagnoses.
LGBT people are significantly more likely to be diagnosed with depression or anxiety.
In 2013, the former Labor Government amended the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 so that the Act would cover discrimination on the grounds of sexuality and gender diverse discrimination.
However, until now, these issues have been investigated by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner.
A New Champion for LBGTI Human Rights
Labor will appoint a permanent, dedicated full-time LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner, to ensure that the rights of LGBTI Australians have a new champion, and lesbian, gay, transgender and intersex Australians can feel safer, more secure and more included in Australian society.
Whilst Labor understands that this will not put an end to the discrimination experienced by many LGBTI Australians, having a dedicated discrimination commissioner is an important next step in the fight for a more equal Australia.
POSITIVE POLICY
Creative industries, creative country
Labor believes the creative industries are central to our lives as Australians.
The visual arts, film, music, theatre and dance chronicle our Australian stories while creating jobs across our cities and regions.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government has delivered nothing but chaos and cuts for the arts.
Labor has a plan to fix the damage and restore our creative industries to their rightful place at the centre of Australia’s cultural and economic life.
From Gough Whitlam’s establishment of the Australia Council to the Gillard Government’s wide-ranging Creative Australia policy, Labor has valued and elevated the contribution of the creative industries to Australia’s social, cultural and economic life.
Our comprehensive plan for the arts will see this sector flourish, reaching out to touch the lives of all Australians.
POSITIVE POLICY
Supporting Indigenous Justice
Labor understand the importance of legal assistance services in providing access to justice for all Australians, and has always supported these vital services.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services (ATSILS) operate in every State and Territory to deliver culturally appropriate front line legal services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in need.
Consistent with Labor’s long-standing commitment to ensure access to justice for all Australians, Labor will ensure that the ATSILS are able to carry out their vital role by committing approximately $24 million to the ATSILS over three years, comprising:
$18.18 million to completely reverse the devastating funding shortfalls imposed by the Abbott-Turnbull Government;
$3.6 million to boost the ATSILS capacity to deal specifically with the scourge of family violence, as part of Labor’s Family Violence Package;
$2.25 million to build capacity in National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services (NATSILS), the peak national representative body for the ATSILS.
For over forty years, the ATSILS have delivered legal assistance, community legal education, advocacy, law reform advocacy and prisoner through-care to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in contact with the justice system.
However, significant cuts to the eight ATSILS by the Abbott-Turnbull Government are undermining the capacity of the ATSILS to provide their vital services to vulnerable Indigenous Australians and communities in desperate need.
Labor recognises that the ATSILS must be properly resourced to fulfil their critical role for Indigenous Australians. For example: Today, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are twice as likely to be in custody than in higher education.
In 1991, at the time of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples were 7 times more likely to be in prison.
Despite ongoing efforts to improve this appalling statistic, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) ‘Prisoners in Australia’ data, in 2015 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples were 15.5 times more likely to be incarcerated than other Australians.
ABS statistics also reveal that since 2004 there has been an 88 per cent increase in the rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders imprisoned, while the non-Indigenous rate has risen by 28 per cent.
The provision of expert, culturally appropriate legal assistance is often critical to ensuring that Indigenous Australians, particularly younger offenders, are not drawn into the downward cycle that often commences with a prison sentence for a relatively minor offence.
With respect to the scourge of family violence, which affects all communities, it is deplorable that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women are 34 times more likely to be hospitalised as a result of injuries caused by assault than non-Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women.
Again, access to legal support may be critically important to survivors of family violence.
Cuts to legal assistance services are a hallmark of Senator Brandis’ disgraceful tenure as Attorney-General under the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
To add insult to injury, despite having responsibility for the ATSILS as the Attorney-General, Senator Brandis has refused every invitation to meet with the executive officers of the NATSILS throughout his entire term of office.
NATSILS report that if unaddressed, the impending funding cuts to the ATSILS imposed by the Abbott-Turnbull Government will: Significantly impact on the capacity of the ATSILS to deliver front line legal services, particularly as budgets have already been cut significantly.
Require the ATSILS to reduce staffing numbers not only for 2017-18, but also going forward into 2018-19 and 2019-20.
Result in an unavoidable withdrawal of frontline services resulting in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples being unrepresented in courts and unable to access culturally competent legal services.
Have unintended costs and put more pressure on the courts, the health sector, corrections services and in this way increase costs to the Federal Government.
Deny many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples the access to justice and procedural fairness that all Australian citizens deserve.
A Shorten Labor Government will not let this happen.
POSITIVE POLICY
Committing to Community Radio
Australian communities will continue to enjoy independent community digital radio, with a Shorten Labor Government committed to restoring much-needed funding to these services.
Community radio is the independent voice of our communities.
More than five million people have access to community radio, with a broad reach not only in our cities, but in rural and regional Australia.
Community radio plays a particularly significant role for Indigenous, print handicapped, ethnic and religious communities.
Unfortunately, Malcolm Turnbull’s approach to community radio is just another example of him saying one thing, and doing another.
As Minister for Communications, Malcom Turnbull said he supported community digital radio. In his first Budget as Prime Minister, he cut $5.6 million from it.
According to the Community Broadcasting Association of Australia, 37 community digital radio services are facing closure altogether from 1 July 2016.
Labor knows these services are a valued part of Australian culture, and we will restore funding to ensure continued delivery of community digital radio services in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, and Adelaide.
This $5.6 million commitment over four years – $1.4 million per annum – will assist with digital platform and infrastructure costs including data connectivity, linking, multiplexing and transmission.
Labor introduced digital radio in Australia and we have a strong track record of supporting community broadcasting.
Independent radio voices should not disappear from our communities — Labor’s support will make sure community broadcasting continues to thrive.
POSITIVE POLICY
Giving Women’s Sport The Attention It Deserves
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver to the ABC the resources it needs to boost coverage of women’s sport, giving our female sports stars the recognition they so obviously deserve.
Australia’s female athletes have given our country some of its greatest sporting glories in recent years – including victories for the Diamonds at the Netball World Cup in 2015, the Southern Stars at the Ashes in 2015, and the Matildas at the Asian Cup in 2010.
The Matildas will also be representing Australia at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics this year, for the first time since 2004.
Yet in 2014 the Australian Sports Commission found that television coverage dedicated to women’s sport was only 7 per cent of all broadcast sports hours.
This is not good enough.
Better television coverage is the first step toward giving our female athletes equal recognition with their male counterparts.
Without it, sportswomen will continue to face barriers to equality in pay, corporate sponsorship and fan support.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government’s savage cuts to the national broadcaster made the problem worse, contributing to the ABC’s decision to cut its regular broadcasts of women’s sport including the Women’s National Basketball League (WNBL).
The $21 million in funding Labor will provide to the ABC will increase coverage of women’s sport on both television and digital platforms by approximately 500 live hours over the next four years.
It is anticipated that the funding will be used to acquire the rights to female sporting competitions that are currently under-represented and where commercial broadcasters have decided not to pursue these rights.
These may include:  The ICC Women’s Cricket World Cup.
The Women’s Hockey World Cup and Champions Trophy.
The FIBA Women’s Basketball World Cup and the WNBL.
The AFC Women’s Asian Cup.
The funds may also be used by the ABC to develop a dedicated women’s sport space on its digital platform iView, covering international women’s teams like the Southern Stars, Opals, Matildas, Diamonds and the Hockeyroos.
This month’s announcement of a landmark deal between Channel 9, Telstra and Netball Australia is a fantastic step in the right direction and shows that the time for greater recognition of Australian sportswomen has finally come.
Today’s announcement is part of Labor’s long-standing commitment to women in sport.
The previous Labor Government invested in female athletes through the Australian Sports Commission; supported the appointment of women to leadership positions on sports boards and governing bodies; and funded a $1.45 million Women in Sports media grant program.
Mr Turnbull broke a promise to the Australian people and slashed more than $250 million from the ABC.
Only Labor will ensure our national broadcaster has the funds necessary to boost women’s sport.
POSITIVE POLICY
A Strong, Vibrant and Sustainable Community Sector
A Shorten Labor Government will reset the Commonwealth’s relationship with the community and not-for-profit sector and usher in a new era of meaningful partnership for positive social change.
Labor understands the critical role played by Australia’s community and not-for-profit sector in building the capacity of individuals and communities, strengthening community cohesion, addressing inequality and harnessing opportunity.
We know that government alone cannot solve all our social problems.
Only by working in partnership with community organisations – and communities themselves – can we bring about lasting change.
But for three years, the Liberals have treated the community and not-for-profit sector with contempt.
First the Liberals ripped more than $270 million worth of funding from frontline services.
They stripped peak advocacy organisations of their funding and slashed money from community legal centres and family violence services.
Then they completely botched their community grants process – pitching community organisations against one another and leaving many frontline services without funding certainty.
As a result, some frontline services have had to cut staff or reduce their services.
Some have closed entirely.
The Liberals also tried to scrap the Australian Charities and Not-For-Profit Commission – only to be fought off by a relentless campaign by Labor and representatives of the community sector.
It’s time to change the way that government works with the community sector.
That is why, a Shorten Labor Government will draw a line in the sand and embark on a new agenda of partnership with community and non-for-profit organisations.
Unlike the Liberals, Labor believes that Government and the Community Sector should work together to develop quality policy, to implement that policy and ensure it delivers real outcomes for vulnerable Australians.
Labor has already established a Federal Labor Community Sector Partnership – a regular forum for debating policy ideas and direction.
If elected, Labor will make the Community Sector Partnership a permanent interface between Government and the community sector.
Labor will also: Reinvigorate the National Compact with the Third Sector – to outline the terms of engagement and agree a joint agenda for working together.
Scrap the Liberal’s shambolic community grants program.
This has been a disaster for community organisations and should not be allowed to continue.
Whilst Labor will honour all existing contracts, over time we will move towards a fairer approach to funding community organisations, including longer term contracts.
Continue to work through the ACNC to streamline reporting mechanisms and cut red tape for community and not-for-profit organisations.
In addition, Labor will work with the community and not-for-profit sectors in the development of Labor’s national information policy, to ensure that the power of open data is available to assist the community sector to do its job more effectively.
We will continue to support community organisations through the volunteer grants program.
We know that community organisations often rely on these small grants to assist them to attract and keep volunteers. Labor will provide a further $10 million toward this important program.
Labor also understands that – particularly as the NDIS and Living Longer Living Better Aged Care Reforms roll out around the country - casualisation insecure work ae of great concerns to many employees.
Labor will work with the community and not-for-profit sector to protect the wages and conditions of employees as these reforms roll out around the country.
POSITIVE POLICY
Jobs Plan For People With Disability
Australia has one of the lowest rates of employment for people with disability in the developed world.
Australia is currently ranked 21st out of 29 countries in employment rates for people with disability.
Labor believes that people with disability deserve the same opportunities as any other Australian to participate in our economy.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme – designed and delivered by Labor – is giving more individual support to people with disability so they have access to employment opportunities.
But the NDIS is just one part of the solution.
As well as delivering the National Disability Insurance Scheme, a Shorten Labor Government will deliver three concrete actions in our first term to boost job opportunities for people with disability.
Labor’s jobs plan for Australians with disability will encourage business and community organisations to employ more Australians living with disability, trial reforms to Disability Employment Services so there is more choice and control, and ensure more people with disability can work in the public service.
Disability Employment Action Plans
Labor will support businesses and not-for-profit organisations to develop their own Disability Employment Action Plans.
These Action Plans will allow organisations to: Identify existing barriers to employment for people with disability in their workplace.
Improve recruitment policies and procedures so they are more inclusive.
Outline specific strategies and targets to boost employment and training opportunities for people with disability within their organisation.
Businesses will continue to be supported by the Employment Assistance Fund, which helps fund workplace modifications so that people with disability can succeed at work.
Labor will provide $1 million to an independent, national not-for-profit disability organisation so they can promote, advise and coordinate the development and delivery of Disability Employment Actions Plans.
The successful organisation will be selected from a competitive tender process
Trialing new approaches to Disability Employment Services
The last Labor Government delivered big changes to employment support services for people with disability.
Since 2010, the number of people with disability receiving employment support has increased by almost 50 per cent and the number of job placements has doubled.
But we know the current system is far from perfect, which is why the next Labor Government will trial further reforms to improve Disability Employment Services.
Labor will ensure changes reflect the core NDIS principles of choice and control.
Labor will investigate new approaches that ‘unbundle’ Disability Employment Services funding so that participants have more control over the services they receive.
This means jobseekers will be able to control their own funding, and choose different service providers to provide different employment supports, depending on their individual needs.
It will mean greater choice for participants, and encourage more competition and innovation in the sector.
Labor will also invest $5 million to trial a new approach to better integrate Disability Employment Services and the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
In selected NDIS locations, people with disability looking for work will be able choose their own employment supports as part of their individual plan.
This means they can access a range of employment assistance from different service providers, depending on their individual needs.
The size and scope of these trials will be informed by consultations with service providers, the National Disability Insurance Agency and local communities.
Public sector employment targets for people with disability
Labor recognises that if we want more businesses and organisations to employ Australians with disability, we must first lead by example.
A Shorten Labor Government will task the Australian Public Service Commission with developing a series of employment targets for people with disability, in partnership with different departments and agencies and in consultation with disability advocates.
The employment targets will be national, department and agency-specific, and will include targets for leadership positions.
Commonwealth departments and agencies will also be expected to develop or update Disability Employment Action Plans to make sure these targets are met.
In this way, Labor will act as we expect others to act – providing opportunities for people with disability to succeed at work.
Labor’s jobs plan for people with disability has been costed by the independent Parliamentary Budget Office.
POSITIVE POLICY
Working Futures: Tackling Youth Unemployment
Australia’s youth unemployment rate has been too high for too long.
Today, more than 262,000 people aged between 15 and 24 are out of work – a little less than one in three Australian jobseekers.
We must do better to stop these young people falling through the cracks and steer them into a secure future instead.
Labor’s Working Futures plan will get more young people into work – and keep them there – by giving them real skills and real opportunities.
Unlike the Turnbull Government’s flawed internships scheme, Working Futures will offer real work experience and fair pay, along with the chance to achieve a proper qualification.
Labor’s Working Futures program will focus on the young people who are finding it hardest to break into the jobs market.
Each year, we will support 20,000 people aged between 15 and 24 through a comprehensive work and training program that sets them on track for a life in work.
As part of Working Futures, jobseekers will take part in:  A six-week work readiness course focusing on essential employment skills as well as personal presentation, interview techniques and job hunting.
A six-month work placement with an employer, paid at an award-equivalent training wage.
A fully-funded Certificate III in a subject of their choice.
Working Futures aims to stop young people getting trapped in unemployment as they get older by tackling the specific barriers that keep them out of work.
Unlike the Turnbull Government’s flawed youth internship program, we will give young jobseekers real skills and real experience for a successful future in work.
POSITIVE POLICY
A National Affordable Housing Strategy
A Shorten Labor Government will provide the national leadership required to address housing affordability and homelessness.
At a time when the number of people experiencing housing stress is rising and the rates of homelessness remain high, we cannot continue to stand by and adopt a business as usual approach.
A Shorten Labor Government will develop a national affordable housing strategy to drive the development of an agreed, coordinated approach to addressing housing affordability in Australia.
A Shorten Labor Government will: Appoint a Minister for Housing and Homelessness.
Make housing affordability a standing item on the COAG agenda.
Include a more comprehensive coverage of housing as part of the Closing the Gap report.
Develop an Affordable Housing Industry Plan to ensure the long-term development of a sustainable affordable housing sector.
Re-establish the National Housing Supply Council.
Investigate the development of national rental standards.
A Shorten Labor Government, in partnership with State and Territories, will: Aim to halve homelessness by 2025.
Agree on national targets to increase the supply of affordable housing dwellings.
Report annually through COAG on progress towards the targets.
Labor wants to work with homelessness services to deliver long-term certainty for the sector and will begin this important work by immediately hosting a national roundtable on homelessness and a meeting of State and Territory Housing and Homelessness Ministers.
A Shorten Labor Government will also provide $88 million over two years for a new Safe Housing program, to improve transitional housing options for women and children escaping domestic and family violence.
From 1 July 2017, Labor will limit negative gearing to new property.
This is a significant policy that will provide an incentive for new construction and add thousands of jobs to the building industry.
Labor is committed to improving fairness, particularly for first home buyers, and will fully grandfather and preserve the tax offsets that are currently available to existing property owners.
Too often discussions on affordable housing concentrate on home ownership – yet over 30 per cent of all households are renters.
Labor will ensure that the needs of renting households are considered within the national strategy on affordable housing.
A Shorten Labor Government will work with the States and Territories to reach agreement on a set of national minimum rental standards.
Labor will commission work to examine:  Rental contract lengths.
Fair processes where landlords seek termination.
Ways to provide greater freedom of choice for tenants.
A Shorten Labor Government will also provide a one-off establishment grant of $3 million to Homes4homes (H4H) a social enterprise by The Big Issue, looking to raise capital funds to invest into affordable housing supply.
POSITIVE POLICY
Increasing Efforts To Prevent And Address Family Violence
A Shorten Labor Government will give the issue of family violence national prominence, with the Prime Minister to deliver an annual Family Violence Statement to Parliament.
This is part of Labor’s latest measures aimed at ending the scourge of family violence in our community.
Eliminating family violence must be a national priority – it will be one of the most important priorities of a Shorten Labor Government.
While Australia has made good progress – there is much more that must be done.
That’s why Labor is announcing further measures aimed at ending the scourge of family violence in our community: An annual statement to the Parliament on progress in eliminating family and domestic violence.
A commitment to responding to the recommendations of the Final Report of the COAG Advisory Panel on Reducing Violence Against Women and their Children, and the recommendations of the Victorian Royal Commission into Family Violence, within a year of taking office.
The appointment of additional Federal Circuit Court judges to Brisbane and Parramatta; to appoint a permanent Federal Circuit Court judge to Wollongong; and to appoint an additional Family Court judge to Brisbane.
$43.2 million over four years to avoid re-traumatisation of victims and survivors from being cross-examined by alleged perpetrators personally – and instead providing for both parties to be legally represented.
A commitment to prohibit non-consensual sharing of private sexual images and recordings, within the first 100 days of a Shorten Labor Government.
A commitment to working within COAG to create specific offences prohibiting the covert installation of spying apps on smartphones.
$3.6 million for pilot programs in relation to family and domestic violence in culturally and linguistically diverse communities.
Protection for people on temporary visas facing family and domestic violence by creating a new type of temporary visa, which will remove impediments to women leaving their partners, and carry work rights so that women leaving violent relationships can seek to support themselves.
These measures build on Labor’s earlier significant commitments to stopping family and domestic violence, including measures such as critical funding for frontline legal services, transitional housing options for women and children escaping family and domestic violence, and hosting a National Crisis Summit within our first 100 days of office.
A Shorten Labor Government will work to ensure women and children are free to live safe from violence – today’s announcements build on our commitment to eliminate family violence in all forms.
POSITIVE POLICY
Champion The March To Gender Equality
Equality for the women of Australia will be a national priority for a Shorten Labor Government.
Central to our plan is Labor’s commitment to safe housing for women and children escaping domestic and family violence, which is a major cause of homelessness in Australia.
Family violence is a crisis which requires more than a change in attitudes.
It is a national disgrace that demands a national approach.
Over one third of people who accessed specialist homelessness services over the three years to 2013-14 were seeking assistance due to domestic and family violence.
The majority of those were women - 110,000 women compared to 12,000 men– and more than 45,000 of this group were women with children.
Many more women want to leave an abusive relationship, but cannot.
Or do leave, only to return because they have nowhere else to go.
This has to change.
Labor will invest $88 million over two years in a new Safe Housing program, to improve transitional housing options for women and children escaping domestic and family violence by filling the gap between crisis housing and longer term arrangements.
The Safe Housing program will increase the number of dwellings specifically available for women and children fleeing domestic violence and will provide funding for support programs that help women to stay safe in their own homes.
This commitment builds on Labor’s announcement in 2015 of an initial $15 million investment in Safe at Home grants to help people affected by family violence stay safe in their own home.
Through strong government leadership, Labor’s positive plan for gender equality will also focus on: Ending the scourge of family violence.
Women’s health.
Support managing work and care.
Equal Opportunity in education.
Gender Pay Equity.
Making retirement incomes fairer.
Advancing women’s wellbeing at home and abroad.
Promoting women’s sport.
Ensuring equality for women in Australia through full, fair and equal access to opportunities in the workforce, leadership and education, is both a social issue and economic issue - a test of our national character and vital building block for national prosperity.
The latest data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics shows that the pay gap is still too high at 17.3 per cent.
Australian women are now earning on average $277.70 per week less than men and have an average of $90,000 less in superannuation.
The G20 has acknowledged that one of the world’s most significant barriers to global economic growth is the persistently low level of women’s participation in the workforce compared with men.
Labor knows that increasing women’s participation and economic security requires action from all parts of the community and there is no area of Australian life, no sector of Australian community, that does not and will not benefit from the full and equal inclusion of women.
The march of women through the institutions of power will define the decade ahead. It is our responsibility to speed this advance, to offer all our daughters and our nation a more prosperous, more equal future.
Labor will provide the genuine leadership and the real resources to deliver equality of opportunity for the women of Australia.
POSITIVE POLICY
Safe Housing For Women
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $88 million over two years in a new Safe Housing program to increase transitional housing options for women and children escaping domestic and family violence and to support programs that enable women to stay safe in their own homes.
One of the most common reasons why women remain in violent relationships is the lack of housing options available if they leave.
Safe Housing projects will support women and children escaping domestic and family violence by providing: Funding to construct or purchase accommodation used to provide short term or transitional housing options at affordable rents with flexible bond arrangements.
Funding for homelessness prevention initiatives which support women and children to remain safely in their own homes.
Labor’s Safe Housing program will provide funding to construct or purchase accommodation used to provide short term or transitional affordable housing options for women and children.
It will support a range of housing options including single or multiunit developments, new builds or existing dwellings.
It will support projects which complement existing domestic and family violence services that provide ongoing support to women including access to financial counselling and legal services.
Labor’s Safe Housing program will also provide funding for initiatives that increase the safety of women and children in their own homes.
States and Territories will be able to bid for funding through a competitive process.
To leverage more funding for the program, the States and Territories will be required to match the federal funding.
Community housing providers, in partnership with specialist domestic violence services, will also be able to submit an application for funding as long as the project has a valid business case which meets the objectives of the program.
Australia’s place in a changing world
Australia seeks a good international society. Our national interest is in a peaceful, stable and prosperous world.
There are many challenges to this global vision – including the threat of conflict between states, the rise of non-state actors, growing economic inequality, and climate change.
We acknowledge our leading role in our region and accept our global responsibilities.
POSITIVE POLICY
Defence Under Labor: A Safe, Secure and Independent Australia
A Shorten Labor Government will keep Australia safe and prosperous while protecting our values and unique way of life.
This should always be the primary obligation of any government.
Labor will continue to adopt a constructive and bipartisan approach to Australia’s national security, because there is no place for political partisanship when it comes to the safety and security of our nation and our fellow Australians.
Labor acknowledges the pivotal role that the Australian Defence Force (ADF) plays in defending Australia and our national interests.
We also acknowledge the critical role that Australian defence industry plays in supporting and equipping our defence personnel.
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure Australia retains a world-class defence force and innovative defence industry by:
Implementing the funding goals of the 2016 Defence White Paper, including raising Defence funding to 2 per cent of GDP by 202021.
Building 12 Future Submarines in South Australia, and mandating that at least 70 per cent of the work is done in Australia.
Maintaining Australia’s strategically vital naval shipbuilding industry by implementing a continuous build of surface warships and ending the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s practice of denying local shipyards the opportunity to compete for work.
Continuing to strengthen defence cooperation with the United States, including by redressing the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s neglect of the US Force Posture Initiatives in Australia’s north.
Reforming the means by which ADF pay and conditions are determined and putting an end to the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cynical attempts to cut the pay and conditions of ADF personnel.
Establishing an intergovernmental taskforce to develop a nationally consistent approach to perfluorinated chemical contamination at Defence and Commonwealth sites.
POSITIVE POLICY
Generating Jobs Through Trade And Investment
A Shorten Labor Government will pursue trade and investment policies that support Australian jobs and living standards by opening up new markets, driving exports into those markets, and attracting new investment.
Labor understands that as the Australian economy transitions out of the mining boom we need to find other sources of growth and jobs.
We need to realise the export potential of sophisticated Australian services industries such as education, tourism, and financial and professional services.
We want to see our advanced manufacturing firms access the global value chains that are reshaping international production.
And our farmers and food processors supplying more high-value Australian food to the rapidly growing countries of Asia.
A Shorten Labor Government will negotiate high-quality international trade agreements that open up new export markets by reducing tariffs, quotas and “behind the border” barriers to trade.
We will do so while maintaining Australia’s right to adopt sound public policies in areas such as health care, ,.
environmental protection
fair working conditions and job opportunities for Australian workers
POSITIVE POLICY
Respecting And Supporting Our Veterans
A Shorten Labor Government will strengthen support for our valued veteran community.
Labor believes in the robust provision of entitlements, services and support to our veterans and their families as a sincere gesture of thanks for the service and sacrifice they have provided our nation.
Australia has a good record of looking after our veterans, it does not have a perfect one.
Labor has listened to the veterans’ community, and recognises that more needs to be done.
Our veterans’ policy needs be structured to respond to the differing needs of veterans according to their stage of life, with flexible programs based on meeting contemporary needs.
In addition to the specific programs outlined below, more information on Labor’s veterans’ policy is available here.
A First Principles Review of Veterans’ Affairs
When grave concerns are raised about the administration, governance and processes within Veterans’ Affairs, we must act.
Serious instances of processing delays, disclosure of veterans’ private information, overpayment of entitlements and continued high levels of complaints have undermined the veteran community’s confidence in the delivery of government services.
A Shorten Labor Government will commission a First Principles Review of Veterans’ Affairs and the delivery of government services.
This end-to-end holistic review will be based on the outcomes required of the Department and focused on agreed upon first-principles.
A first principles review will: Rectify administrative, governance and process failings.
Ensure government services are structured in a way that allows them to meet existing and future challenges efficiently.
Secure the trust of the veterans’ community.
This is not an attack on DVA employees, or their commitment to the important work they do.
This is about putting people first.
This is about making sure the systems we have in place work for the people they are meant to serve.
This is about making sure the foundations of our veterans’ affairs system is strong.
More information on this policy is available here.
The Australian National Veterans Arts Centre in Melbourne
In addition, a Shorten Labor Government will establish the Australian National Veterans Arts Centre (ANVAC) at 310 St Kilda Road in Melbourne.
Currently derelict, the St Kilda Road facility was formerly a repatriation centre used by World War I veterans as the Repatriation Commission Outpatient Clinic.
The building will be remediated and restored by the Department of Defence, before being returned to its original purpose as a centre caring for veterans.
The facility is superbly located for this purpose, being proximate to the Shrine of Remembrance, Victoria Barracks, public transport links and the Melbourne CBD.
ANVAC will host programs and initiatives for a new generation of veterans seeking support for mental health and PTSD, including through arts therapy.
Veterans have long engaged in the arts for a range of reasons including for rehabilitation from wounds, injury or illness, or as a form of therapy to capture their lived experience and to stimulate morale within peer groups.
More information on Labor’s plan for the Australian National Veterans Arts Centre is available here.
Counting the cost: Veterans’ suicide and homelessness
The rate of veteran suicide and homelessness, and the way in which it is recorded, continues to raise significant concerns within the veterans’ community and the general public more broadly.
The lack of comprehensive data or the ‘under-reporting’ of veterans’ suicide has been of particular concern.
As part of its mental health policy, Labor has committed to working with the States and Territories to build an accurate picture of deaths by suicide and suicide attempts and agree to a national minimum data set for suicide prevention.
As part of this initiative, Labor will ensure the inclusion of an ‘ADF flag’ within this data set, to allow governments to identify if an individual had previously served in the ADF or was a partner or child of an individual who served in the ADF.
Labor will also work with the States and Territories to include an ‘ADF flag’ within the existing Specialist Homelessness Service Collection.
In addition, Labor will fund a comprehensive study into veterans’ homelessness to identify members of the veteran community who are experiencing or at risk of homelessness.
The study will make recommendations to address factors that increase the risk of homelessness and solutions on how to better connect homeless veterans with appropriate support services.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Regional And Global Efforts
According the UNHCR, the number of displaced people fleeing from war, conflict or persecution is now at its highest level since World War II.
The forced displacement of people around the globe is currently at unprecedented levels.
By the close of 2015 an estimated 60 million individuals were forcibly displaced globally by persecution, conflict, violence and human rights violations.
This is equivalent to one person in every 122 on the planet being displaced by violence and war.
Labor believes that Australia can do more to address this global humanitarian crisis.
We believe in a compassionate approach to asylum seekers that enables refugees to progress their claims safely and securely.
Labor has a plan to work in our region and with international humanitarian agencies to tackle this crisis while maintaining the integrity of Australia’s borders.
First and foremost, a Shorten Labor Government will provide significantly increased annual funding to the UNHCR for its global work program and its work in South East Asia and the Pacific.
At a time when the global humanitarian need is greater than ever, Labor will provide $450 million over three years to support the important work of the UNHCR.
This funding commitment will place Australia in the top 5 of global contributors to the UNHCR.
Labor will also reinstate references to the UN Refugees Convention in the Migration Act to reverse the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s retrograde efforts to undermine international law.
Furthermore, we will take a leadership role within South East Asia and the Pacific to build a regional humanitarian framework to improve the situation of asylum seekers.
This would include supporting the UNHCR in providing health and education services to asylum seekers.
It would also involve advocating for work rights for asylum seekers, similar to what would have been achieved under the proposed Malaysia Agreement in 2011.
Labor believes Australia has a role to play as a responsible global citizen in responding to the current humanitarian crisis.
We will not shirk this responsibility as the Abbott-Turnbull Government has consistently sought to do. Instead, we will work in our region and with international agencies to progress refugees’ claims safely, securely and responsibly.
POSITIVE POLICY
Protecting Overseas Aid Projects
A Shorten Labor Government will act immediately to save projects facing closure due to the Liberals’ cuts to overseas aid.
Because of a $224 million cut to overseas aid in the Liberals’ last Budget, critical projects like maternal and child health, schooling, clean water, and sanitation, risk being axed from 30 June this year.
Today, Labor commits that if elected, we will reverse the $224 million cut – to keep these projects going in 2016-17.
Since coming to Government in 2013, the Liberals have gutted Australia’s aid program.
It is now the weakest in history.
Sadly, the Liberals’ cuts have been so deep that it is impossible to fix the aid program quickly.
Labor’s commitments are designed to help start rebuilding Australia’s aid program.
In addition to today’s $224 million announcement, Labor will: Provide $450 million, over three years, to support the important work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, placing Australia in the top five global contributors.
Invest an extra $40 million a year, from 2017-18, to help Australian NGOs deliver frontline services to some of the world’s poorest people.
Legislate to restore accountability to Australia’s aid program by reintroducing the annual Ministerial Budget Statement on overseas aid, after it was axed by the Liberals in 2014.
Labor will release the statement at the same time as each federal Budget to show how aid is allocated by sector, country, and region.
Legislate for an independent evaluation of Australia’s aid program, as well as the measurement and reporting of effectiveness.
Over the next four years, Labor will provide around $800 million more for overseas aid than the Liberals.
Labor supports a strong aid program because as a good global citizen Australia has a duty to help reduce poverty and inequality, and respond effectively to humanitarian crises.
Labor supports a strong aid program because it helps keep Australia safe, by working to tackle serious diseases and violence in our region, and in our world.
Labor supports a strong aid program because it benefits Australia’s economy when countries go from being aid recipients to trading partners.
POSITIVE POLICY
Australia’s Submarines Built Here.
Under Labor, Australia’s Future Submarines will be built, maintained and sustained in Australia.
Building and delivering Australia’s new submarine fleet is an inter-generational decision.
Future Prime Ministers, from both sides of politics, will have to live with the decision that is taken.
This is the most significant procurement decision of our time, with construction and maintenance costs going beyond many billions of dollars over the life of the project – it is vital that we get it right.
For strategic defence reasons it is critical that Australia retains an independent capability to build, sustain and maintain our next fleet of submarines.
It is simply too important for flawed selection processes and partisan politics.
Before the last election, the future construction of Australia’s submarine fleet was bipartisan, with both Liberal and Labor declaring the next generation of submarines would be built in Australia.
Since then, the Liberals have turned the issue of Australia’s submarine build into a political football and refused to guarantee they will deliver on that promise.
And while a preferred bidder – DCNS – has been announced, contracts are not yet signed.
Only Labor has been clear and consistent: we would make it a condition of the contract that the successful tenderer build Australia’s Future Submarines in Australia.
This will ensure Australia secures a future submarine fleet that meets our national defence requirements at the most competitive price for taxpayers
, and grows thousands of good Australian jobs in the process.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Increasing The Humanitarian Intake
Major conflicts in Syria, Iraq and the nations across Africa have seen the number of displaced people fleeing from war, conflict or persecution rise to its highest level since World War II.
The forced displacement of people around the globe is currently at unprecedented levels.
By the close of 2015 an estimated 60 million individuals were forcibly displaced globally by persecution, conflict, violence and human rights violations.
This is equivalent to one person in every 122 on the planet being displaced by violence and war.
Australia is a nation writ large because of migration.
We should never forget the debt we owe to generations of migrants, and refugees, who in seeking a better life have enriched the lives of all Australians.
There can be no doubt that immigration has unreservedly been one of the secrets of Australian success.
We are proud so many of us are Australians by choice.
That is why Labor will increase Australia’s annual humanitarian intake to 27,000 by 2025.
As part of our commitment to demonstrating leadership in our region, a portion of the program will be dedicated to resettling refugees from the region.
This is Labor’s plan to ensure that Australia takes our fair share of refugees.
It is a plan that ensures that Australia steps up and fulfils a greater responsibility as a good global citizen; a nation that is responsible in the world and secure at home.
POSITIVE POLICY
Defending Australia – Future Frigates
Under Labor, Australia’s Future Frigates will be built, maintained and sustained in Australia.
For strategic defence reasons it is critical that Australia retains an independent shipbuilding capability here at home.
Having a truly world class shipbuilding sector will require a commitment to a continuous build program for our Future Frigates to ensure these vessels not only have the best technology at the best price but also maximise efficiency and workforce expertise.
Labor will provide Australian shipbuilders with the certainty they need to make investments and to recruit and retain the highly-skilled workforce needed to build these vital capabilities for Australia’s defence forces.
Expert advice is unequivocal; that anything less than a commitment to build the Future Frigates in Australia will put jobs at risk, along with our capacity to continue to be a world-class naval shipbuilding industry for the long term.
POSITIVE POLICY
Counter Terrorism under Labor
Protecting Australians, Defending Human Rights
There is no greater responsibility of government than to protect the safety and security of its citizens.
Terrorism is an affront to all humanity, and Labor will continue to ensure our nation’s security while upholding the democratic rights and freedoms that Australians have for generations fought to protect.
Proper resourcing and an effective legal framework that gives our security and law enforcement agencies the powers they need to keep us safe are fundamental to Australia’s security environment.
Labor will continue to fully support our agencies in their vital work to protect the safety of all Australians and defend our nation’s security.
Australians expect transparency and accountability in security and enforcement activities to the greatest extent possible, and Labor will continue to champion those safeguard mechanisms.
In ensuring that the rights and freedoms of Australians are protected as well as their physical security, transparency and accountability safeguards also help ensure that Australians have confidence in their security and law enforcement agencies.
This further reinforces our security because maintaining a close relationship with the community they protect helps our security agencies to carry out their vital role.
Bipartisanship
National security is a bipartisan issue.
It should always be above politics, as no individual and no party has a monopoly on patriotism.
A Shorten Labor Government will continue to work in a bipartisan way to ensure our nation’s security.
Throughout the term of the Abbott-Turnbull Government, Labor has worked in a constructive manner through the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security to ensure all proposed national security legislation is fit for purpose.
Following rigorous scrutiny of new laws through the committee process, Labor has achieved significant improvements to national security legislation including the introduction of important safeguards such as the establishment of a Public Interest Advocate in situations where security agencies seek metadata from journalists.
Working in a bipartisan manner, Labor helped to enact over 100 substantive amendments to the national security bills put forward by the Abbott-Turnbull Government, including 26 substantive amendments to the Australian Citizenship Amendment (Allegiance to Australia) Bill 2015.
In each new round of counter terrorism legislation proposed by the Government, Labor has enhanced oversight and transparency.
We have ensured that any new powers are extended for no longer than is necessary, through the application of sunset clauses on some extraordinary powers, and with mandated reviews.
Our focus is about the best interests and safety of Australians.
Our interest is always in striking the right balance between national security considerations and the fundamental democratic rights and freedoms all Australians cherish.
Labor will always be mindful that in seeking to protect ourselves from the terrorist threat, we do not undermine the very foundations of our strength that the terrorists want to destroy.
An Inclusive Approach To National Security
A Shorten Labor Government will pursue a balanced approach to counter terrorism—drawing on new means, new methods and adapting to new challenges.
We put our trust in the expertise, professionalism and skill of our security agencies and emergency services personnel, and we should be guided by their advice.
Labor believes early intervention and community engagement, working in combination with strong and bipartisan counter terrorism legislation, are all key to preventing vulnerable young Australians being groomed into extremist ideology.
As was noted by ASIO director-general Duncan Lewis in mid-2015, “we understand we can’t arrest our way to success. If there is indeed a silver bullet to solving the issue of radicalisation, it is in the area of social cohesion.”
Countering violent extremism programs need appropriate funding, cohesive narratives and they need to provide viable alternatives to disenfranchised young Australians who may be vulnerable to terrorist recruiters.
We must give agencies and communities all the support we can to enhance their capability and to counter the radicalisation of vulnerable youths.
In addition, Labor will build effective partnerships with other countries to respond to common security challenges, including continuing engagement with the United States and Europe, and further strengthening our ties with our Asian and other regional neighbours.
Strong international institutional arrangements should coordinate international responses to security threats.
Labor will respect and uphold these arrangements and actively participate to influence positive outcomes.
Under a Shorten Labor Government, Australia will continue to work directly with regional institutions to strengthen their capacity to deal with terrorist challenges in our region.
Labor’s Record
Labor is proud of our record on national security.
In Government between 2007 and 2013, we increased funding for public order and safety by hundreds of millions of dollars in real terms.
In December 2008, Prime Minister Rudd delivered Australia’s first National Security Statement to Parliament, setting out our national security challenges and a comprehensive approach to responding to those challenges.
Labor also commissioned and built ASIO’s new purpose-designed headquarters, named after Labor Prime Minister Ben Chifley, who in 1949 signed the directive establishing ASIO.
In 2010 Labor published a Counter Terrorism White Paper, which outlined a detailed strategy to combat the threat of terrorism, based on four key elements: Analysis: an intelligence-led response to terrorism, driven by a properly connected and properly informed national security community.
Protection: taking all necessary and practical action to protect Australia and Australians from terrorism at home and abroad.
Response: providing an immediate and targeted response to specific terrorist threats and terrorist attacks should they occur.
Resilience: building a strong and resilient Australian community to resist the development of any form of violent extremism and terrorism on the home front.
The White Paper established a Counter Terrorism Control Centre within the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation to create closer links and bring together expertise from across our security, intelligence and law enforcement agencies and focus Australia’s counter terrorism efforts.
In addition, Federal Labor has improved cooperation between the Australian Federal Police (AFP), ASIO and the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
POSITIVE POLICY
Chemical Contamination At Defence Sites
Labor will establish an intergovernmental taskforce to develop a nationally consistent approach to perfluorinated chemical contamination at Williamtown and other Commonwealth sites.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide additional support to address the immediate needs of the Williamtown community as a result of perfluorinated chemical contamination.
Perfluorinated chemical contamination in Williamtown and elsewhere is a serious issue.
We will fund an initial round of 10,000 voluntary blood tests at affected sites across the country, establishing baseline readings to allow for ongoing monitoring of contaminant exposure.
At Williamtown, a Shorten Labor Government will: Improve community consultation by establishing a local community liaison officer at RAAF Base Williamtown, ensuring the community has a single point of contact — if you want to speak to Defence, you’ll know who to contact.
Fund a study to analyse the impact of perfluorinated chemical contamination on the Williamtown community.
Provide a grant to the NSW Government to connect affected properties within the Williamtown investigation area to town water, as identified by the NSW EPA.
Extend income support for affected commercial fishers until March 2017.
Advocate for leniency by lending institutions with respect to business and home loan repayments until February 2017 for affected individuals.
Seek leniency with respect to licence fee payments until February 2017 for commercial fishing licences.
Labor has listened to the local community..
We understand their concerns regarding uncoordinated and poorly communicated responses from government
We will rectify this.
A Shorten Labor Government will develop a nationally consistent approach for screening and health guidelines, assessments, containment, management, standards and remediation protocols for sites that are identified as being contaminated with perfluorinated chemicals.
We also recognise that perfluorinated chemical contamination is a growing concern at Commonwealth sites around Australia.
Defence has identified 18 sites known, or likely, to have used substantial quantities of perfluorinated chemicals on site.
There are also other Commonwealth sites that have, or are suspected of having, perfluorinated residues.
The intergovernmental taskforce will coordinate the response of government agencies to the contamination at RAAF Base Williamtown and other Commonwealth sites.
This will ensure that the Federal Government’s response is consistent, coordinated and transparent.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Tourism Visa Reform
A Shorten Labor Government will undertake an audit of Australia’s tourist visa offering for each of our main target markets, and undertake an assessment of how that offering compares to our major competitors.
Australia’s position in the Asia-Pacific presents an unparalleled opportunity to respond to the increasing number of Asian visitors, particularly from China, who want to visit Australia.
However, the tourism industry is increasingly concerned that Australia’s current policy settings around visa charges and the interaction with our border are not conducive to capitalising on our position in the region.
The tourist visa audit will assess the competitiveness of our visa fees, visa processing arrangements and the ease of interaction with the Australian border.
In addition, with a view to the growing Chinese market, Labor will review: The cost of the 10-year multiple entry visa so that it is competitive with that for Chinese citizens visiting the US and the EU.
Introducing an online visa application, in both English and Mandarin, which can be submitted online at any time.
Reducing the processing time for visas submitted online to within 48 hours.
The feasibility of reforming the Tourist Refund Scheme by introducing an online, streamlined claiming process based on the Singapore model.
The factors which have an impact on passenger facilitation at International Airports, with Perth International Airport to be looked at as a priority.
POSITIVE POLICY
Defence Remuneration Reform
To ensure greater fairness and transparency in remuneration for the Australian Defence Force, a Shorten Labor Government will reform Defence’s Workplace Remuneration Arrangement and the means by which ADF pay and conditions are determined.
Unlike most employees, ADF personnel are not legally entitled to cooperatively negotiate their pay, conditions and terms of employment.
Instead, proposed wage rises are jointly determined by the Australian Government and the ADF.
These proposals are then approved or rejected by the Defence Force Remuneration Tribunal, which has no arbitral powers in this case and can only approve or reject.
ADF members rely on independent peak associations, such as the Defence Force Welfare Association, to advocate for them in this process.
In 2014, the Abbott-Turnbull Government shockingly botched the pay deal for our sailors, soldiers and air force personnel.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government’s initial offer consisted of a below inflation pay rise of 1.5 per cent per annum over three years, and cuts to precious recreational and Christmas leave.
Following a campaign led by the Defence community and supported by Labor, the Liberals ultimately settled on a 2 per cent per annum increase and the maintenance of existing conditions.
The Liberals’ mishandling of ADF pay highlighted the inadequacies in the current process used to set ADF pay and conditions.
This process was roundly criticised by Defence commentators as being conflicted and non-consultative.
Labor’s plan
A Shorten Labor Government will provide ADF personnel with a greater voice in the remuneration process by providing appropriate resources for the Defence Force Welfare Association to undertake this role.
Labor will safeguard fairness and transparency in the setting of remuneration for the ADF through:
The provision of a grant of $100,000 per annum to improve the capacity of the Defence Force Welfare Association to advocate on behalf of ADF members, particularly in relation to remuneration determinations.
Amending, where needed, and in consultation with stakeholders, the timelines and processes by which a future Labor Government would make ADF remuneration determinations.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Mandatory Reporting And More Transparency
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure Australia has a compassionate, humane and safe approach to irregular migration throughout our region.
Labor believes in a compassionate approach to asylum seekers which enables refugees to progress their claims safely and securely.
Labor is absolutely committed to preventing people smuggling and ensuring vulnerable people do not drown at sea.
Labor’s regional resettlement arrangement has been the most effective deterrent against the ability of criminal people smugglers to prey on vulnerable people.
But processing offshore does not, for one minute, mean we can offshore or outsource our responsibility to treat people fleeing from persecution with humanity.
Vulnerable people should never be subject to degrading violence in Australia's name.
Labor will restore the faith of Australians in our onshore and offshore processing networks by providing independent oversight of facilities, and creating an independent statutory advocate to protect the interests in children seeking asylum.
We will also legislate mandatory reporting of any instances of abuse of children in immigration detention.
Labor’s policies fulfil Australia’s fundamental desire to be a safe, prosperous nation.
Our humane and compassionate policies will keep vulnerable people safe and restore Australia’s place in the world as a respected and responsible global citizen.
Above all, a Labor Government will fulfil the solemn duty we owe to the youngest people in our nation's care.
POSITIVE POLICY
Letting Australian NGO's Do Their Good Work Overseas
Social justice and environmental protection play a central role in economic growth and development.
It is now well acknowledged that inequality hampers growth.
The IMF, OECD, Reserve Bank of England, and various Nobel economists are all saying that more equal growth is good for the rich as well as the poor, and that more equal growth equals longer, stronger, and higher growth.
It is now undeniable that climate change will have, and in places is already having, a particularly savage effect on developing nations.
This includes nations in the Pacific which have contributed little carbon pollution to the atmosphere, but are feeling climate change in their everyday lives already.
At the same time we face acute development challenges as millions of people are displaced by conflict across the world.
It’s clear that with new global challenges like this, our aid program needs to change too.
That is why future Labor Government will provide greater certainty and more support to Australian NGOs to make sure they are well placed to meet global development challenges.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $30 million a year to the Australian NGO Cooperation Program from 2017-18.
Our commitment is for new and additional funding to the aid program.
Since the 2013 election, the Abbott-Turnbull government has drastically cut aid funding and created a great deal of uncertainty for NGOs.
Australian NGOs are among the best in the world.
They do outstanding work, particularly on policy development and implementation, sharing knowledge and expertise, and measuring and reporting on progress towards sustainable development.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $10 million each year from our first Budget in 2017-18 to build partnerships, increase the effectiveness of Australian programs, and ensure we are getting the most from every single dollar spent on aid.
As part of this new program Labor will support planning, research, evaluation and greater collaboration across the sector – with funding available to NGOs, academia, government, and the philanthropic and private sector.
This will mean that we will continue developing our aid evidence base, our measurement and reporting on aid effectiveness, and we will know just how well we are shaping up against our targets.
This funding will help us to share with the world the remarkable Australian expertise in areas like anti-corruption and good governance; disability inclusive aid; treating preventable blindness; WASH; and of course, efforts toward improving gender equality.
Labor will also restore accountability to the Australian aid program by reintroducing the annual Ministerial Budget statement or “Blue Book” on overseas aid.
And we will legislate for transparency and accountability to improve aid effectiveness.
Thanks to decisions by the Abbott-Turnbull Government, Australia’s overseas aid program is the weakest it has ever been in our nation’s history.
Labor is committed to rebuilding so that we can once again see Australia lead in international development.
Labor is committed to supporting Australia’s aid program, not gutting it.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor’s Positive Plan For Tourism
After three years of neglect and cutbacks by the Liberal Government, Labor will restore tourism to the heart of Australia’s economic narrative, recognising its importance as a super-growth sector for local jobs and the economy.
Tourism is Australia’s largest services export and employs over one million Australians.
There are more than 276,000 tourism businesses in Australia, which deliver $94.5 billion in revenue every year.
Tourism GDP increased 5.3 per cent in 2014-15, more than three times the growth for the total economy.
This trend is expected to continue over the next 20 years – but a coordinated approach by the Federal Government is essential to realise its full potential.
Putting people first in every State and Territory
Labor will govern for all Australians, in every State and Territory.
That's why we've got positive plans to build infrastructure and create jobs for every State and Territory.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For WA
Western Australia Labor´s positive policies
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENI believe Labor’s positive plan is the right one for Western Australia.I believe that when middle and working class Western Australians succeed, the whole of Western Australia will prosper.That’s why I will work every day to deliver for middle and working class families in Western Australia.Western Australia’s economy is going through a difficult transition.As Western Australian families feel the impact of the end of the mining investment boom, Western Australians deserve a Federal Government with a clear plan to transition the economy in a way that protects jobs and improves living standards.Labor has developed more than 100 positive policies to achieve just that.Labor’s plan will build the infrastructure that Western Australia needs to create jobs and drive growth."Labor will build the Perth METRONET, creating 4,000 jobs for Western Australians."It includes protecting Medicare, keeping medicine affordable and investing in hospitals.It includes record investment in schools, scrapping the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees and reforming TAFE.Labor’s plan includes protecting penalty rates, scrapping the Liberals’ harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and giving families immediate child care relief.On 2 July, Western Australians will have a choice between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a tax cut to big business.My commitment to Western Australia at this election is that a Shorten Labor Government will always put people first.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies atwww.100positivepolicies.org.auBill Shorten
LABOR’S PLAN TO PROTECT WESTERN AUSTRALIAN JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE
Western Australia’s economy is in transition.
As the mining investment boom declines, Labor is investing in the job-creating infrastructure that will create jobs and drive Western Australia’s economy for the next generation.
BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE WESTERN AUSTRALIA NEEDS
Labor is building the infrastructure that Western Australia needs.
Labor will contribute: $1 billion to plan and build Perth’s METRONET, which will create 4,000 jobs for Western Australia.
$80 million to build the North Lake Bridge.
$45 million for the Wanneroo Road upgrade, which will create around 230 jobs for Western Australia.
$59 million for the High Street Fremantle upgrade, creating around 150 jobs in Western Australia.
$25 million for Denny Avenue grade separation project.
$3 million for roadworks at Scarborough Beach Road.
$1 million for Bayswater Train Station.
$2 million for Kwinana Outer Harbour logistics planning.
Labor is committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices – so young Western Australians can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
COMPLETING THE NBN
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Western Australia needs to create the jobs of the future. Under Labor, more than 133,000 more WA households will get fibre-to-the-premises than they will under the Liberals.
DRIVING INNOVATION IN OUR REGIONS
Currently, around two-thirds of Australia’s startup activity takes place in just one city: Sydney.
Labor will create a Regional Innovation Fund, which will kick-start a range of initiatives to expand the role of Australia’s regions in contributing to the national innovation effort.
Labor will fund the establishment of up to 20 new accelerators in universities or TAFEs in regions around the country.
This means students that live outside Perth will get access to resources often limited to people living in the big cities.
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA TOURISM FUND
Labor’s Northern Australia Tourism fund will help build the tourism infrastructure that northern Western Australia needs to grow the sector and create jobs.
INDIGENOUS RANGERS
Labor will double the number of Indigenous Rangers working under the Working on Country Program.
This means more Indigenous Australians in Western Australia will have the opportunity to have their work on country recognised as paid employment, whilst at the same time protecting the natural and cultural treasures of Western Australia.
LABOR’S PLAN TO STOP THE PRIVATISATION  OF MEDICARE
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they tried to introduce a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The Liberals have done all they can to destroy Medicare.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for every Australian into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will fight to protect it.
Labor will reverse the Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means an average family in Western Australia with two children will be around $400 better off under Labor.
Labor will fight the Liberals’ attempts to privatise Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberal’s medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script.
This means that under Labor, medicines will be more affordable than under Malcolm Turnbull.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
Labor will increase funding for Western Australian hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, hospitals in Western Australia can expect to receive around $220 million more than they would under the Liberals.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best healthcare systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, mean that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those Western Australians suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer. in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
With an economy in transition, Western Australia’s future prosperity depends more than ever on the quality of our education system.
Australia can’t be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Western Australian child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING WESTERN AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan aims to put Australia’s schools back among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs - and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $330 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Western Australian schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
Labor will also support the Stars Foundation to increase the number of young Indigenous women completing Year 12.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
Western Australia won’t have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university – no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee - removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at the University of Western Australia, Edith Cowan University and Curtin University based on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
PROTECTING TAFE - STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and maths – STEM.
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean around 5,000 new or up-skilled STEM teachers for Western Australian schools. Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
Labor will also make sure all Western Australian students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR STRONG FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class families are succeeding, Australia succeeds.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
Labor believes in budget repair, but unlike the Liberals we will not be fixing the Malcolm Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
CHILD CARE
Every one of the 38,800 families in Western Australia that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off under Labor.
From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Many of the 61,310 families in Western Australia that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year with Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will oppose the Government’s harsh cuts to Family Tax Benefits.
Under Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
Families earning over $100,000 will have a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
Under Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
THE LIBERALS HAVE TAKEN WA  FOR GRANTED
Under the Liberals, Western Australians have been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to Family Tax Benefits and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
RISING UNEMPLOYMENT
Since the Liberals were elected, the unemployment rate has skyrocketed from 4.6 per cent to 5.6 per cent.
There are 15,900 more Western Australians lining the unemployment queues since 2013. 29,200 full time jobs have been lost under the Liberals.
There are now 700 fewer apprentices in Western Australia than there were in 2013.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut more than $3.1 billion from Western Australian schools.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students.
It means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
Since 2013, the Liberals have ripped nearly $600 million from Western Australian universities.
If the Liberals get their way, students in Western Australia would be facing fees of up to $100,000 for degrees.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have made massive cuts to Western Australian hospitals.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 137,000 families in Western Australia will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 117,000 single parents and single income families will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of Western Australia’s 300,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, pensioners in Western Australia who are trying to study will lose $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Age Pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will have their pension reduced after six weeks under the Liberals.
CUTS TO SCIENCE AND THE CSIRO
The Liberals’ cuts to the CSIRO have resulted in 49 job losses in Western Australia.
A further 29 jobs will be lost if Malcolm Turnbull is re-elected.
LABOR’S NEW TEAM FOR WA WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A health care system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS. WE ARE UNITED. WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For Tasmania
Tasmania. Labor´s positive policies
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENI understand that many Tasmanian families are doing it tough.That is why Labor has developed a plan for Tasmania that will create opportunity and improve the living standards of Tasmanian families. I believe that when working and middle class Tasmanians are succeeding, all of Australia will prosper. Tasmanians deserve a Federal Government that will fight for them. They deserve a Government that will put their interests ahead of the interests of big business.And my commitment to Tasmanians this election is that I will do just that. I will put people ﬁrst. Over the last 12 months Labor’s Tasmania Taskforce has engaged with local communities in a frank conversation about how best to get Tasmania moving again.  Labor’s positive plan for Tasmania has been developed to reflect the findings of the Tasmanian Taskforce and the thousands of Tasmanians who made submission through this process.Labor has developed more than 100 positive policies.Our plan includes protecting Medicare, keeping medicine more affordable and investing in hospitals. It includes record investment in schools, scrapping the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees and reforming TAFE." We’ll invest $44 million in Tasmanian tourism infrastructure, delivering projects across the State.”Labor’s plan includes protecting penalty rates, scrapping the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and giving families immediate child care relief.It also includes building the infrastructure that Tasmania needs to create local jobs and drive local growth for the future.On July 2, Tasmanians will have a choice between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a tax cut to big business.I believe Labor’s plan is the right one for Tasmania, and for Tasmanians.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies atwww.100positivepolicies.org.au/.Bill Shorten
LABOR’S PLAN TO STOP THE PRIVATISATION
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they tried to introduce a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule and now they are trying to privatise Medicare services.
The Liberals are doing everything they can to wreck Medicare and take our healthcare system down the same path as America’s, where it is your credit card and not your Medicare Card that determines the quality of your health care.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal healthcare system continues to deliver good health outcomes for Tasmanians into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it. Labor will reverse the Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means an average family in Tasmania with two children will be more than $400 better off under Labor. Labor will reverse the Liberals’ plans to privatise Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class Tasmanian families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script.
This means that under Labor, medicines will be more affordable than under the Liberals.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
With Labor, hospitals in Tasmania can expect to receive around $40 million more in funding than they would under the Liberals.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments at Royal Hobart Hospital, Launceston General Hospital, North West Regional Hospital and Mersey Community Hospital.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best healthcare systems in the world.
But Australia’s healthcare system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, means that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life-saving research and care for those Tasmanians suffering from chronic disease..
These commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer all around Australia.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
Almost $1 million to deliver Youthbeat Mission Australia safety and early intervention program in North-west Tasmania.
$3 million to build a 10 bed hospice at the Allambi facility in Northern Tasmania.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
Tasmania’s future prosperity depends more than ever on the quality of its education system.
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Tasmanian student the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy and job market.
IMPROVING TASMANIAN SCHOOLS-YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan aims to put Tasmania’s schools among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in:
More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs – and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $60 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Tasmanian schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Labor will also make sure all Tasmanian students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean new and up-skilled STEM teachers for Tasmanian schools.
Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
Tasmania won’t have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university – no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee – removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at the University of Tasmania without a $100,000 debt sentence.
UTAS EXPANSION
Labor will invest $150 million so the University of Tasmania can construct two new campuses at Inveresk in Launceston and West Park in Burnie.
The projects will create 3,110 jobs, including 265 additional academic and professional jobs, and support 12,000 new students in North and North-West Tasmania.
PROTECTING TAFE, STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor knows that every student does not want to go to university.
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
LABOR’S PLAN TO PROTECT TASMANIAN JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE
Labor is investing in the job-creating infrastructure that will create local jobs and drive Tasmania’s economy for the next generation.
BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE TASMANIA NEEDS
Labor is investing in the infrastructure that Tasmania needs, including: Shared pathway between Latrobe and Devonport.
Develop rest of the Kentish Trails Masterplan.
The Hobart Airport Roundabout Upgrade.
The Circular Head Pool.
Former Kingston High Site Revitalization.
The Derwent Valley Sporting Precinct.
The Northern Midlands Fitness and Sports Centre.
The Okines Community Garden Facilities Extension.
The York Cove Precinct Plan.
The George Town Economic Development Prospectus.
The Silt Management Initiatives in York Cove.
Stage Two of the Wivenhoe Recreation Ground Lighting Project.
Upgrade of the Burnie Tennis Centre.
Delivering the Wynyard Foreshore Masterplan.
Delivering the NBN to Tasmania’s west coast communities.
Prospect Sports Complex.
Labor will establish a framework requiring a proportion of the jobs on major federally funded projects to be delivered as apprenticeships – so young Tasmanians can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
A Shorten Labor Government will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to make a further submission in favour of retaining penalty rates.
COMPLETING THE NATIONAL BROADBAND NETWORK
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Tasmania needs to create the jobs of the future.
Under Labor, up to 2 million more homes and businesses across the country will get first-rate fibre-to-the-premises than they will under the Liberals, including the West Coast of Tasmania.
DRIVING INNOVATION IN TASMANIA’S REGIONS
Labor will create a Regional Innovation Fund, which will kick-start a range of initiatives to expand the role of Tasmania’s regions in the national innovation and jobs effort.
Labor will fund the establishment of up to 20 new accelerators in universities or TAFEs in regions around the country, including in Tasmania.
This means students that live in Tasmania’s regions will get access to resources often limited to people living in the big cities.
TASMANIA TOURISM FUND
Labor’s Tasmania Tourism Infrastructure Fund will deliver a $44 million boost to tourism infrastructure investment in Tasmania. Initial commitments include:$1.3 million for the Burnie Waterfront Masterplan.
$4 million for the Three Capes Walk in south-eastern Tasmania.
$10 million to sink the ex-HMAS Tobruk off Tasmania’s north-east coast as a dive wreck.
Tasmania is the only state without a modern naval vessel wreck.
$15 million for Cradle Mountain amenities upgrades.
The remaining $13.7 million in funding will be subject to further announcements.
MIDLAND HIGHWAY
Tasmanians know that the only way their state will receive the infrastructure funding it needs to support jobs and growth is with Labor.
Labor will give back the $100 million the Liberals stole from the Midland Highway upgrades and deliver the full $600 million State and Federal commitment that Tasmanians were promised.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Labor believes Tasmania can become the renewable energy powerhouse of Australia – and we have a plan to make it happen.
Labor will provide $5 million to fast-track the development of a business case for a second Bass Strait interconnector, delivering greater energy security and more job opportunities for Tasmanians.
Subject to a positive business case and an assessment by Infrastructure Australia, up to $500 million will be made available through our Infrastructure Financing Facility for the construction of the second cable.
The project will be funded and delivered in partnership with the Tasmanian Government and the private sector.
BASSLINK
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Tasmania needs to create the jobs of the future.
Under Labor, up to 2 million more homes and businesses across the country will get first-rate fibre-to-the-premises than they will under the Liberals, including the West Coast of Tasmania.
TASMANIA TASKFORCE – DELIVERING FOR TASMANIA
For over a year, Labor’s Tasmania Taskforce has been engaging with Tasmanians in a frank conversation about how best to get our state moving again.
The Tasmania Taskforce has looked at where we are today, and more importantly where we want to be tomorrow.
Specifically, the Taskforce has focussed on: Economic Development – supporting Tasmania’s transition to growing industries, including renewable energy, boutique food production, aquaculture and eco and cultural tourism.
Employment – creating the jobs of today and the jobs of the future with particular focus on working with businesses and the community to improve opportunities in areas of high youth unemployment.
Education – expanding the skills base, knowledge and resilience of students and increasing Year 12 attainment rates to ensure the next generation are equipped to drive the new economy, as well as to provide retraining and upskilling opportunities for experienced workers.
Growth – building on the clean, green, safe lifestyle of our state and the premium reputation of Tasmanian goods and services.
Labor’s positive plan for Tasmania has been developed to reflect the findings of the Tasmanian Taskforce.
SUPPORTING TASMANIA’S FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class Tasmanian families are succeeding, Australia prospers.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
With Labor, budget repair will be fair.
Unlike the Liberals we will not be fixing Mr Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
EARLY EDUCATION AND CARE
There are 11,800 families in Tasmania that rely on the Child Care Benefit who will be better off under Labor. From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017 will also mean that many of the 14,400 families in Tasmania that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will not support the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cuts to Family Tax Benefits (FTB).
With Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
For families earning over $100,000 there will be a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
With Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
With Labor, Family Tax Benefits will be targeted to the Tasmanian families that need them most.
LIBERAL CUTS HAVE HURT TASMANIA
Under the Liberals, Tasmanians have been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to families and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Tasmanians cannot afford another three years of cuts that hurt Tasmanian families and the economy.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut $640 million from Tasmanian schools over the next 10 years.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students in Tasmania and fewer jobs for Tasmanian workers.
It also means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
The Liberals will rip $168 million from the University of Tasmania over the next five years.
If the Liberals get re-elected, students in Tasmania will be facing fees of up to $100,000 for a university degree.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have made massive cuts to Tasmanian hospitals.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care and put the health of Tasmanians at risk.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 40,000 families in Tasmania will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected. That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 33,000 single parents and single income families in Tasmania will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of Tasmania’s 106,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, many pensioners in Tasmania will lose up to $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Under the Liberals, age pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will also have their pension reduced after six weeks.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 Budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals also tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance.
These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS.
WE ARE UNITED.
WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For The Central Coast
Central Coast.Labor´s positive policies
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENA few weeks ago I came to the Central Coast to announce that Labor will protect Medicare.Labor will fight for Medicare, and we will fight for the people of the Central Coast." I believe that when middle and working class people from the Central Coast succeed, the whole region will prosper.”That’s why I will work every day to deliver for middle and working class families in this marvellous region.My commitment is to always put people first.Labor’s positive plan is the right one for the Central Coast.Our plan includes protecting Medicare, keeping medicine more affordable and investing in hospitals. We will govern for all Australia, not just the big cities, not just the people who have the money to be able to afford to go and see the doctor.Our plan includes record investment in schools, scrapping the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees and reforming TAFE, because Labor wants every child to have the same chance of succeeding at school, and in life.We will build the infrastructure that the Central Coast needs – improving local roads and building other vital community projects.Labor’s plan includes protecting penalty rates, scrapping the Government’s harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and giving families immediate child care relief.On July 2, people from the Central Coast have a clear choice: between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a tax cut to big business.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies at www.100positivepolicies.org.auBill Shorten
LABOR’S PLAN TO PROTECT CENTRAL COAST JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE
Labor is investing in the infrastructure that will create jobs and drive the Central Coast’s economy for the next generation.
INVESTING IN THE INFASTRUCTURE THE CENTRAL COAST NEEDS
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $65 million in infrastructure funding for Central Coast locals, businesses and tourists.
Labor’s Central Coast Roads Rescue Package will remedy long-standing congestion and safety issues across the region.
Labor will support: $60 million for the Central Coast Roads Rescue Package.
$2.5 million for footpaths to improve pedestrian safety and movement.
$2.5 million for stage two of the popular Ettalong foreshore project to extend the Labor-funded stage one, delivered in 2013.
$500,000 to scope the feasibility of straightening the railway line between the Central Coast and Sydney and building a new road from Woy Woy to the M1.
Labor’s investment in Central Coast roads will create hundreds of local jobs.
CENTRAL COAST MEDICAL AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $32.5 million in the Central Coast Medical and Research Institute, to be built adjacent to Gosford Hospital.
This world-class facility will create hundreds of jobs and enable local medical, nursing and allied health students to train where they live.
INNOVATION HUB AT THE CENTRAL COAST CAMPUS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE
Labor’s Regional Innovation Fund will kick-start a range of initiatives to expand the role of the Central Coast region in the national innovation and jobs effort.
Labor will fund the establishment of up to 20 new accelerators in universities or TAFEs in regions around the country, including one potentially at the University of Newcastle (Central Coast).
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
ARTS CENTRE FOR THE GOSFORD WATERFRONT
Labor will commit $20 million to build a Performing Arts Centre in Gosford, because we believe the arts belong to all Australians.
The arts are not just an important avenue for creativity – the arts sector generates jobs and brings communities together.
COMPLETING THE NBN
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Australia needs to create the jobs of the future.
Under Labor, Gosford got the real NBN and the jobs have already started to flow.
LABOR WILL STOP THE  PRIVATISATION  OF MEDICARE
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they introduced a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule and now they are trying to privatise Medicare payments.
The Liberals are doing everything they can to wreck Medicare and take our health care system down the same path as America’s, where it is your credit card and not your Medicare Card that determines the quality of your health care.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for the Central Coast into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it.
Labor will reverse the Liberal Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means an average family on the Central Coast with two children will be more than $400 better off under Labor.
We will prevent the Liberals from privatising Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class Central Coast families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script.
Under Labor, medicines will be more affordable.
HELPING CENTRAL COAST WOMEN ACCESS DRUG TREATMENT
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure that pregnant women in need of residential drug treatment to manage their addiction have better access to services.
Labor will invest $2.2 million in Kamira Alcohol and Other Drug Treatment Services in Wyong, which provides residential rehabilitation treatment for mothers and pregnant women with alcohol and drug addiction problems.
We recognise drug and alcohol dependency affects families from all walks of life – this funding will enable this facility to provide greater services to help families make positive changes in their lives.
NEW PRIMARY HEALTH CARE FACILITY
Labor will provide $2 million to fit out a new primary health care facility on the Woy Woy peninsula.
People from the Central Coast should be able to access the health care they need, when and where they need it.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
Labor will increase funding for Central Coast hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, hospitals in NSW can expect to receive around $630 million more than they would under the Liberals.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, mean that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those on the Central Coast suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer all around Australia.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
$84 million to improve access to lifesaving technologies for Australians with type 1 diabetes.
$1.5 million to upgrade paediatric services at Wyong Hospital.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
Every child deserves to have the same chance of succeeding at school, and in life, as any other child in the country.
Improving education is the key to opportunity and to the future economic and social prosperity of our nation.
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Central Coast child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING CENTRAL COAST SCHOOLS - YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s “Your Child. Our Future” plan aims to put Australia’s schools back among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs – and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $79 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Central Coast schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Labor will also make sure all Central Coast students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean new and up-skilled STEM teachers for Central Coast schools.
Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
The Central Coast will not have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university, no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee, removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at the universities on the Central Coast, in the Hunter and in Sydney based on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
COMMONWEALTH INSTITUTE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION – GOSFORD
A Shorten Labor Government will establish a Commonwealth Institute of Higher Education to deliver new technical and higher education opportunities in Gosford.
A total of ten pilot sites will be established across Australia, in locations where need is demonstrated, and where institutions, industry and local communities are ready to implement locally tailored Institutes.
The Institutes will see universities working together with TAFEs to trial approaches tailored to local conditions, giving students the skills they need to find local jobs.
PROTECTING TAFE, STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
STRONG FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class families are succeeding, Australia succeeds.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
Labor believes in budget repair, but unlike the Liberals we will not be fixing Mr Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
CHILD CARE
Every one of the 10,090 families on the Central Coast that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off under Labor. From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017 will also mean that many of the 12,080 families on the Central Coast that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will not support the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cuts to Family Tax Benefits (FTB). With Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
For families earning over $100,000 there will be a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
With Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
LOCAL COMMUNITY PROJECTS
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a range of community projects to improve quality of life on the Central Coast.
These include:  $500,000 for the Banjo Memorial Skate Park in Wamberal.
$50,000 for the Bateau Bay PCYC for youth programs.
$1 million to build a grandstand at Edsaac Oval for the benefit of the whole community.
THE LIBERALS HAVE HURT THE  CENTRAL COAST
Under the Liberals, the Central Coast has been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to Family Tax Benefits and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
The Central Coast cannot afford another three years of cuts that hurt families and the local economy.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut almost $400 million from Central Coast schools.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students on the Central Coast..
It also means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
Over the next five years the Liberals will rip more than $1.8 billion from NSW universities, including more than $200 million from the University of Newcastle.
If the Liberals get their way, university students from the Central Coast would be facing fees of up to $100,000 for degrees.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have made massive cuts to Central Coast health facilities.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 20,000 families on the Central Coast will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 17,000 single parents and single income families on the Central Coast will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of the Central Coast’s 66,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, many pensioners from the Central Coast will lose up to $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Under the Liberals, age pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will also have their pension reduced after six weeks.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 Budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals also tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS. WE ARE UNITED. WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For Victoria
VICTORIA LABOR’S POSITIVE POLICIES
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENThis election, my commitment to the people of Victoria is that I will always put people first.Labor has a clear plan to grow the economy in a way that protects jobs and improves living standards.Labor will protect Medicare, keep the price of medicine affordable and invest in Victoria’s hospitals.We will properly fund schools, reform TAFE and scrap the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees."We will build the infrastructure that Victorians need to create well-paying jobs and drive long-term growth across the state."As the automotive industry declines, we will work with Victorian parts makers to open new markets for advanced manufacturing, here in Australia and overseas.We will protect penalty rates and scrap the Liberals’ harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits.Labor’s plan also includes giving families immediate child care relief, tackling child care waiting lists and increasing access to outside school hours’ care.I believe Labor’s positive plan is the right one for my home state, Victoria.That’s why I will work every day to deliver for middle and working class families in Victoria.Australians deserve a Federal Government with a clear plan – not just a slogan.On July 2, Victorians will have a choice between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ next round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so that Malcolm Turnbull can give a $50 billion tax cut to big business.Labor has developed more than 100 positive policies to build a fairer Australia – I invite you to read more about them at www.100positivepolicies.org.au.Bill Shorten
LABOR WILL PROTECT VICTORIAN JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS  OF THE FUTURE
Labor is investing in the job-creating infrastructure that will create jobs and drive the Victorian economy for the next generation.
Labor is committed to ensuring every Victorian has the opportunity to work to their full capacity.
Our initiatives will create more than 5,000 real jobs for Victorians.
BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE VICTORIA NEEDS
A Shorten Labor Government will build the infrastructure that Victoria needs.
Labor will invest: $380 million to support the Melbourne Metro project.
$356 million to complete the upgrade of the M80 Ring Road, completing the final three sections of the 38 km corridor.
$510 million to upgrade the efficiency of the Monash Freeway, one of Australia’s busiest.
$120 million to boost park-and-ride capacity at high use train stations.
$220 million for the Murray Basin Rail project, upgrading Victoria’s rail freight network.
$350 million for a Victorian Regional Roads package.
$90 million to upgrade Bridge Inn Road, to serve the growing community around Mernda.
$85 million to upgrade Thompsons Road, opening up industrial areas in Melbourne’s southeast.
$67 million to build the O’Herns Road upgrade, improving freight movements through industrial areas.
$22 million for an extension to the number 11 tram route, improving access to services and reducing congestion.
$20 million for the first stage of the duplication of Craigieburn Road.
$50 million to establish a High Speed Rail Planning Authority.
BACKING SMALL BUSINESS TO CREATE LOCAL JOBS
A Shorten Labor Government will reward small businesses that are creating jobs and getting Australian jobseekers back to work.
Labor’s New Jobs Tax Cut will allow small businesses to claim a deduction of up to $20,000 to offset the wages of up to five new employees.
The jobs tax cut will be available to businesses who employ young people, carers returning back to work or older Australians.
Businesses supporting job seekers will be able to claim an additional deduction of up to $100,000 a year for hiring new staff.
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING
Labor will work with the Victorian Government to deliver new jobs in the regions worst affected by motor vehicle production closures.
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $59 million to the Manufacturing Transition Boost to ensure regions across the nation – including Geelong – continue to have strong workforces and local jobs.
This jobs package will provide pathways to new jobs for skilled workers by attracting new business investment in advanced manufacturing.
Firms will be given new incentives to diversify into new products and markets and employ automotive workers who have lost their jobs.
LOCAL JOBS FOR LOCAL PEOPLE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $68.6 million over the next four years to deliver our Local Jobs for Local People program.
This will connect people in disadvantaged communities with jobs and training opportunities, while also tackling the complex social and local issues that can keep Australians from finding work.
Local Jobs for Local People will operate in up to 20 communities across Australia in areas of high employment or entrenched disadvantage.
WORKING FUTURES
Labor will get more young people into work and keep them there by delivering real skills and real opportunities through our Working Futures program.
We will support 20,000 people per year aged between 15 and 24 through a comprehensive work and training program, setting them on the right path to ongoing high-quality jobs.
Working Futures will offer real training for real jobs.
This is in stark contrast to the Liberals’ exploitative Youth PaTH program, which subsidises employers to place jobseekers on internships without sufficient workplace protections.
REAL SKILLS GOOD JOBS
Labor will help more young people into apprenticeships by creating 10,000 new Apprentice Ready places, offering a 20-week, industry endorsed pre-apprenticeship course for trades on the National Skills Needs List.
A Shorten Labor Government will help retrenched workers gain formal recognition of their skills through an accelerated apprenticeship program to help them find their next job.
A National Skills Recognition Entitlement program will help 5,000 mature-aged, retrenched workers turn their extensive work experience into formal qualifications.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced. Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
DRIVING INNOVATION IN OUR CITIES AND OUR REGIONS
Labor has a comprehensive plan to drive innovation in our cities and our regions.
This includes: Supporting great ideas by co-investing in early stage and high potential companies through the $500 million Smart Investment Fund.
Bringing together the superannuation, venture capital and startup sectors in an Innovation Investment Partnership to identify barriers holding back investment in Australian-based venture capital funds and early-stage enterprises.
Improving access to finance for startups and micro-businesses through a partial guarantee scheme, Startup Finance.
Getting startups to help solve government problems through Challenge Platforms and support startups to compete in government tenders.
Accelerating innovation in our regions through Regional Innovation Hubs.
Reforming the innovation architecture through Innovate Australia.
Improving the flow of capital to startups through Startup Capital.
Backing our best and brightest overseas with Landing Pad hubs for Australian innovators.
COMPLETING THE NBN
A Shorten Labor Government will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s mess and build the national broadband network Australia needs to create the jobs of the future.
We will scale up the rollout of fibre-to-the-premises and phase out the rollout of fibre-to-the-node.
This will deliver fibre-to-the-premises to up to two million homes and businesses across the country that would otherwise get Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper version, including hundreds of thousands of homes and businesses in Victoria.
For example, Mernda, Doreen, North Bendigo, Geelong, Belgrave and Upwey will all be fibre-to-the-premises.
LABOR WILL STOP THE PRIVATISATION  OF MEDICARE
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then the Liberals tried to introduce a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The Liberals are doing all they can to destroy Medicare.
In contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for every Australian into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it. Labor will reverse the Liberal Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means that under Labor an average family in Victoria with two children will be more than $400 better off.
We will prevent the Liberals from privatising Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class Victorian families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script. Under Labor, medicines will be more affordable.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
A Shorten Labor Government will increase funding for Victorian hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, Victorian hospitals will receive $500 million more than they would under the Liberals.
This means that Goulburn Valley Health, Alfred Hospital, the Royal Women’s Hospital and all public hospitals in Victoria will be better resourced under Labor.
REVERSING CUTS TO PATHOLOGY AND IMAGING SERVICES
A Shorten Labor Government will reverse Malcolm Turnbull’s cuts to bulk billing incentives for pathology and diagnostic imaging.
Labor’s measures give pathologists and radiologists a specific incentive to bulk bill.
Without it, bulk billing will fall, co-payments will rise, and patients will be forced to pay more for tests and scans – or to skip them altogether.
PREVENTATIVE HEALTH PACKAGE
Chronic diseases are the leading cause of illness, disability and death in Australia.
Many of these diseases are due to preventable risk factors such as physical inactivity, poor nutrition, smoking and harmful use of alcohol.
Labor has developed a five-point plan to combat chronic disease:  Investing in 50 Healthy Communities nationwide, to help communities at the greatest risk of chronic disease to stay well.
Tackling obesity through Australia’s first National Physical Activity Strategy and a National Nutrition Framework.
Expanding the successful Better Health Channel into a nationwide platform for health information.
Continuing the push to reduce smoking rates, particularly in at-risk communities.
Addressing harmful use of alcohol through a National Alcohol Strategy.
A NATIONAL APPROACH TO SUICIDE PREVENTION
A Shorten Labor Government will target a 50 per cent reduction in suicides over the next 10 years.
Our National Suicide Strategy will provide a strong national commitment to reduce the suicide toll, and coordinate a focused effort across Australia.
Labor will commission Australia’s first national data-set of suicide deaths and invest $72 million over three years for 12 regional suicide pilot projects.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, means that Australia requires new and innovative approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those Victorians suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include, nationally: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer all around Australia.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
$84 million to improve access to lifesaving technologies for Australians with type 1 diabetes.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Improving education is the key to opportunity, to innovation and to the future economic and social prosperity of our nation.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Victorian child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING VICTORIAN SCHOOLS - YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan will put Australia’s schools back where they belong among the very best in the world.
Every student, in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs - and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade.
This includes $815 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Victorian schools in 2018 and 2019 compared to the Liberals.
Whether your child is studying at Ballarat High School or at Strathmore Secondary College, they will get more targeted, needs-based investments under Labor.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
Victoria will not have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university – no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee - removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at La Trobe or Monash University based on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
PROTECTING TAFE - STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Labor will also make sure all Victorian students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for our future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support a further 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean around 6,500 new or up-skilled STEM teachers for Victorian schools.
Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
STRONG FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class families are succeeding, Australia succeeds.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
Labor believes in budget repair, but we will not be fixing the Liberals’ budget mess by attacking the family budget.
CHILD CARE
Every one of the 139,580 families in Victoria that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off under Labor.
From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Many of the 185,770 families in Victoria that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year with Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will oppose the Government’s harsh cuts to Family Tax Benefits.
Under Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
Families earning over $100,000 will see a modest reduction in their FTB-A end of year supplement.
Under Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
LOCAL COMMUNITY PROJECTS
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a range of community projects to improve quality of life for the people of Victoria.
These include: $5 million to deliver the Colac Early Years Children’s Centre, providing primary and tertiary health and wellbeing services to young children and their families.
$5 million to fund a major upgrade to the Ballarat Sports and Event Centre project.
$2 million to upgrade car parking at Maroondah Hospital, building more than 300 new spaces to ease chronic congestion.
$6 million for the Wheatsheaf Community Hub in Glenroy – this facility will include a children’s centre, a modern local library, multipurpose community meeting rooms and a Neighbourhood House.
$2 million to redevelop the Bendigo Tennis Centre and support the cultivation of future tennis stars in regional Victoria.
$1.4 million to expand the capacity of the Gisborne Oaks Residential Aged Care Facility to address urgent demand for dementia care in Macedon Ranges region.
THE LIBERALS HAVE HURT VICTORIA
Under the Liberals, Victorians have been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to Family Tax Benefits and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Victorians can’t afford another three years of cuts and chaos.
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT
Under the Liberals the youth unemployment rate in Victoria has remained above 12 per cent, more than double the national unemployment rate.
The number of young people in job training across the country has plummeted, and there are now an astonishing 30,000 fewer apprentices in Victoria than there were in 2013.
Labor is committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices, so young people from all across Victoria can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut more than $7.1 billion from Victorian schools.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students in Victoria.
It also means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from lowsocio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
Since 2013, the Liberals have ripped nearly $1.5 billion from Victorian universities.
If the Liberals get their way, students in Victoria would be facing fees of up to $100,000 for their university degrees.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have cut billions from Victorian hospitals.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 379,000 families in Victoria will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 308,000 single parents and single income families in Victoria will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of Victoria’s more than one million pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, pensioners in Victoria who are trying to study will lose $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Age Pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will have their pension reduced after six weeks under the Liberals.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals also tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance.
These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS. WE ARE UNITED. WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Chemical Contamination At Defence Sites
Labor will establish an intergovernmental taskforce to develop a nationally consistent approach to perfluorinated chemical contamination at Williamtown and other Commonwealth sites.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide additional support to address the immediate needs of the Williamtown community as a result of perfluorinated chemical contamination.
Perfluorinated chemical contamination in Williamtown and elsewhere is a serious issue.
We will fund an initial round of 10,000 voluntary blood tests at affected sites across the country, establishing baseline readings to allow for ongoing monitoring of contaminant exposure.
At Williamtown, a Shorten Labor Government will: Improve community consultation by establishing a local community liaison officer at RAAF Base Williamtown, ensuring the community has a single point of contact — if you want to speak to Defence, you’ll know who to contact.
Fund a study to analyse the impact of perfluorinated chemical contamination on the Williamtown community.
Provide a grant to the NSW Government to connect affected properties within the Williamtown investigation area to town water, as identified by the NSW EPA.
Extend income support for affected commercial fishers until March 2017.
Advocate for leniency by lending institutions with respect to business and home loan repayments until February 2017 for affected individuals.
Seek leniency with respect to licence fee payments until February 2017 for commercial fishing licences.
Labor has listened to the local community..
We understand their concerns regarding uncoordinated and poorly communicated responses from government
We will rectify this.
A Shorten Labor Government will develop a nationally consistent approach for screening and health guidelines, assessments, containment, management, standards and remediation protocols for sites that are identified as being contaminated with perfluorinated chemicals.
We also recognise that perfluorinated chemical contamination is a growing concern at Commonwealth sites around Australia.
Defence has identified 18 sites known, or likely, to have used substantial quantities of perfluorinated chemicals on site.
There are also other Commonwealth sites that have, or are suspected of having, perfluorinated residues.
The intergovernmental taskforce will coordinate the response of government agencies to the contamination at RAAF Base Williamtown and other Commonwealth sites.
This will ensure that the Federal Government’s response is consistent, coordinated and transparent.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Tourism Visa Reform
A Shorten Labor Government will undertake an audit of Australia’s tourist visa offering for each of our main target markets, and undertake an assessment of how that offering compares to our major competitors.
Australia’s position in the Asia-Pacific presents an unparalleled opportunity to respond to the increasing number of Asian visitors, particularly from China, who want to visit Australia.
However, the tourism industry is increasingly concerned that Australia’s current policy settings around visa charges and the interaction with our border are not conducive to capitalising on our position in the region.
The tourist visa audit will assess the competitiveness of our visa fees, visa processing arrangements and the ease of interaction with the Australian border.
In addition, with a view to the growing Chinese market, Labor will review: The cost of the 10-year multiple entry visa so that it is competitive with that for Chinese citizens visiting the US and the EU.
Introducing an online visa application, in both English and Mandarin, which can be submitted online at any time.
Reducing the processing time for visas submitted online to within 48 hours.
The feasibility of reforming the Tourist Refund Scheme by introducing an online, streamlined claiming process based on the Singapore model.
The factors which have an impact on passenger facilitation at International Airports, with Perth International Airport to be looked at as a priority.
POSITIVE POLICY
Defence Remuneration Reform
To ensure greater fairness and transparency in remuneration for the Australian Defence Force, a Shorten Labor Government will reform Defence’s Workplace Remuneration Arrangement and the means by which ADF pay and conditions are determined.
Unlike most employees, ADF personnel are not legally entitled to cooperatively negotiate their pay, conditions and terms of employment.
Instead, proposed wage rises are jointly determined by the Australian Government and the ADF.
These proposals are then approved or rejected by the Defence Force Remuneration Tribunal, which has no arbitral powers in this case and can only approve or reject.
ADF members rely on independent peak associations, such as the Defence Force Welfare Association, to advocate for them in this process.
In 2014, the Abbott-Turnbull Government shockingly botched the pay deal for our sailors, soldiers and air force personnel.
The Abbott-Turnbull Government’s initial offer consisted of a below inflation pay rise of 1.5 per cent per annum over three years, and cuts to precious recreational and Christmas leave.
Following a campaign led by the Defence community and supported by Labor, the Liberals ultimately settled on a 2 per cent per annum increase and the maintenance of existing conditions.
The Liberals’ mishandling of ADF pay highlighted the inadequacies in the current process used to set ADF pay and conditions.
This process was roundly criticised by Defence commentators as being conflicted and non-consultative.
Labor’s plan
A Shorten Labor Government will provide ADF personnel with a greater voice in the remuneration process by providing appropriate resources for the Defence Force Welfare Association to undertake this role.
Labor will safeguard fairness and transparency in the setting of remuneration for the ADF through:
The provision of a grant of $100,000 per annum to improve the capacity of the Defence Force Welfare Association to advocate on behalf of ADF members, particularly in relation to remuneration determinations.
Amending, where needed, and in consultation with stakeholders, the timelines and processes by which a future Labor Government would make ADF remuneration determinations.
POSITIVE POLICY
Immigration – Mandatory Reporting And More Transparency
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure Australia has a compassionate, humane and safe approach to irregular migration throughout our region.
Labor believes in a compassionate approach to asylum seekers which enables refugees to progress their claims safely and securely.
Labor is absolutely committed to preventing people smuggling and ensuring vulnerable people do not drown at sea.
Labor’s regional resettlement arrangement has been the most effective deterrent against the ability of criminal people smugglers to prey on vulnerable people.
But processing offshore does not, for one minute, mean we can offshore or outsource our responsibility to treat people fleeing from persecution with humanity.
Vulnerable people should never be subject to degrading violence in Australia's name.
Labor will restore the faith of Australians in our onshore and offshore processing networks by providing independent oversight of facilities, and creating an independent statutory advocate to protect the interests in children seeking asylum.
We will also legislate mandatory reporting of any instances of abuse of children in immigration detention.
Labor’s policies fulfil Australia’s fundamental desire to be a safe, prosperous nation.
Our humane and compassionate policies will keep vulnerable people safe and restore Australia’s place in the world as a respected and responsible global citizen.
Above all, a Labor Government will fulfil the solemn duty we owe to the youngest people in our nation's care.
POSITIVE POLICY
Letting Australian NGO's Do Their Good Work Overseas
Social justice and environmental protection play a central role in economic growth and development.
It is now well acknowledged that inequality hampers growth.
The IMF, OECD, Reserve Bank of England, and various Nobel economists are all saying that more equal growth is good for the rich as well as the poor, and that more equal growth equals longer, stronger, and higher growth.
It is now undeniable that climate change will have, and in places is already having, a particularly savage effect on developing nations.
This includes nations in the Pacific which have contributed little carbon pollution to the atmosphere, but are feeling climate change in their everyday lives already.
At the same time we face acute development challenges as millions of people are displaced by conflict across the world.
It’s clear that with new global challenges like this, our aid program needs to change too.
That is why future Labor Government will provide greater certainty and more support to Australian NGOs to make sure they are well placed to meet global development challenges.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $30 million a year to the Australian NGO Cooperation Program from 2017-18.
Our commitment is for new and additional funding to the aid program.
Since the 2013 election, the Abbott-Turnbull government has drastically cut aid funding and created a great deal of uncertainty for NGOs.
Australian NGOs are among the best in the world.
They do outstanding work, particularly on policy development and implementation, sharing knowledge and expertise, and measuring and reporting on progress towards sustainable development.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $10 million each year from our first Budget in 2017-18 to build partnerships, increase the effectiveness of Australian programs, and ensure we are getting the most from every single dollar spent on aid.
As part of this new program Labor will support planning, research, evaluation and greater collaboration across the sector – with funding available to NGOs, academia, government, and the philanthropic and private sector.
This will mean that we will continue developing our aid evidence base, our measurement and reporting on aid effectiveness, and we will know just how well we are shaping up against our targets.
This funding will help us to share with the world the remarkable Australian expertise in areas like anti-corruption and good governance; disability inclusive aid; treating preventable blindness; WASH; and of course, efforts toward improving gender equality.
Labor will also restore accountability to the Australian aid program by reintroducing the annual Ministerial Budget statement or “Blue Book” on overseas aid.
And we will legislate for transparency and accountability to improve aid effectiveness.
Thanks to decisions by the Abbott-Turnbull Government, Australia’s overseas aid program is the weakest it has ever been in our nation’s history.
Labor is committed to rebuilding so that we can once again see Australia lead in international development.
Labor is committed to supporting Australia’s aid program, not gutting it.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor’s Positive Plan For Tourism
After three years of neglect and cutbacks by the Liberal Government, Labor will restore tourism to the heart of Australia’s economic narrative, recognising its importance as a super-growth sector for local jobs and the economy.
Tourism is Australia’s largest services export and employs over one million Australians.
There are more than 276,000 tourism businesses in Australia, which deliver $94.5 billion in revenue every year.
Tourism GDP increased 5.3 per cent in 2014-15, more than three times the growth for the total economy.
This trend is expected to continue over the next 20 years – but a coordinated approach by the Federal Government is essential to realise its full potential.
Putting people first in every State and Territory
Labor will govern for all Australians, in every State and Territory.
That's why we've got positive plans to build infrastructure and create jobs for every State and Territory.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For WA
Western Australia Labor´s positive policies
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENI believe Labor’s positive plan is the right one for Western Australia.I believe that when middle and working class Western Australians succeed, the whole of Western Australia will prosper.That’s why I will work every day to deliver for middle and working class families in Western Australia.Western Australia’s economy is going through a difficult transition.As Western Australian families feel the impact of the end of the mining investment boom, Western Australians deserve a Federal Government with a clear plan to transition the economy in a way that protects jobs and improves living standards.Labor has developed more than 100 positive policies to achieve just that.Labor’s plan will build the infrastructure that Western Australia needs to create jobs and drive growth."Labor will build the Perth METRONET, creating 4,000 jobs for Western Australians."It includes protecting Medicare, keeping medicine affordable and investing in hospitals.It includes record investment in schools, scrapping the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees and reforming TAFE.Labor’s plan includes protecting penalty rates, scrapping the Liberals’ harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and giving families immediate child care relief.On 2 July, Western Australians will have a choice between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a tax cut to big business.My commitment to Western Australia at this election is that a Shorten Labor Government will always put people first.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies atwww.100positivepolicies.org.auBill Shorten
LABOR’S PLAN TO PROTECT WESTERN AUSTRALIAN JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE
Western Australia’s economy is in transition.
As the mining investment boom declines, Labor is investing in the job-creating infrastructure that will create jobs and drive Western Australia’s economy for the next generation.
BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE WESTERN AUSTRALIA NEEDS
Labor is building the infrastructure that Western Australia needs.
Labor will contribute:$1 billion to plan and build Perth’s METRONET, which will create 4,000 jobs for Western Australia.
$80 million to build the North Lake Bridge.
$45 million for the Wanneroo Road upgrade, which will create around 230 jobs for Western Australia.
$59 million for the High Street Fremantle upgrade, creating around 150 jobs in Western Australia.
$25 million for Denny Avenue grade separation project.
$3 million for roadworks at Scarborough Beach Road.
$1 million for Bayswater Train Station.
$2 million for Kwinana Outer Harbour logistics planning.
Labor is committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices – so young Western Australians can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
COMPLETING THE NBN
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Western Australia needs to create the jobs of the future. Under Labor, more than 133,000 more WA households will get fibre-to-the-premises than they will under the Liberals.
DRIVING INNOVATION IN OUR REGIONS
Currently, around two-thirds of Australia’s startup activity takes place in just one city: Sydney.
Labor will create a Regional Innovation Fund, which will kick-start a range of initiatives to expand the role of Australia’s regions in contributing to the national innovation effort.
Labor will fund the establishment of up to 20 new accelerators in universities or TAFEs in regions around the country.
This means students that live outside Perth will get access to resources often limited to people living in the big cities.
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA TOURISM FUND
Labor’s Northern Australia Tourism fund will help build the tourism infrastructure that northern Western Australia needs to grow the sector and create jobs.
INDIGENOUS RANGERS
Labor will double the number of Indigenous Rangers working under the Working on Country Program.
This means more Indigenous Australians in Western Australia will have the opportunity to have their work on country recognised as paid employment, whilst at the same time protecting the natural and cultural treasures of Western Australia.
LABOR’S PLAN TO STOP THE PRIVATISATION  OF MEDICARE
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they tried to introduce a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The Liberals have done all they can to destroy Medicare.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for every Australian into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will fight to protect it.
Labor will reverse the Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means an average family in Western Australia with two children will be around $400 better off under Labor.
Labor will fight the Liberals’ attempts to privatise Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberal’s medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script.
This means that under Labor, medicines will be more affordable than under Malcolm Turnbull.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
Labor will increase funding for Western Australian hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, hospitals in Western Australia can expect to receive around $220 million more than they would under the Liberals.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best healthcare systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, mean that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those Western Australians suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer. in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
With an economy in transition, Western Australia’s future prosperity depends more than ever on the quality of our education system.
Australia can’t be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Western Australian child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING WESTERN AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan aims to put Australia’s schools back among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs - and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $330 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Western Australian schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
Labor will also support the Stars Foundation to increase the number of young Indigenous women completing Year 12.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
Western Australia won’t have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university – no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee - removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at the University of Western Australia, Edith Cowan University and Curtin University based on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
PROTECTING TAFE - STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and maths – STEM.
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean around 5,000 new or up-skilled STEM teachers for Western Australian schools. Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
Labor will also make sure all Western Australian students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR STRONG FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class families are succeeding, Australia succeeds.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
Labor believes in budget repair, but unlike the Liberals we will not be fixing the Malcolm Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
CHILD CARE
Every one of the 38,800 families in Western Australia that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off under Labor.
From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Many of the 61,310 families in Western Australia that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year with Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will oppose the Government’s harsh cuts to Family Tax Benefits.
Under Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
Families earning over $100,000 will have a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
Under Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
THE LIBERALS HAVE TAKEN WA  FOR GRANTED
Under the Liberals, Western Australians have been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to Family Tax Benefits and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
RISING UNEMPLOYMENT
Since the Liberals were elected, the unemployment rate has skyrocketed from 4.6 per cent to 5.6 per cent.
There are 15,900 more Western Australians lining the unemployment queues since 2013. 29,200 full time jobs have been lost under the Liberals.
There are now 700 fewer apprentices in Western Australia than there were in 2013.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut more than $3.1 billion from Western Australian schools.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students.
It means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
Since 2013, the Liberals have ripped nearly $600 million from Western Australian universities.
If the Liberals get their way, students in Western Australia would be facing fees of up to $100,000 for degrees.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have made massive cuts to Western Australian hospitals.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 137,000 families in Western Australia will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 117,000 single parents and single income families will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of Western Australia’s 300,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, pensioners in Western Australia who are trying to study will lose $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Age Pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will have their pension reduced after six weeks under the Liberals.
CUTS TO SCIENCE AND THE CSIRO
The Liberals’ cuts to the CSIRO have resulted in 49 job losses in Western Australia.
A further 29 jobs will be lost if Malcolm Turnbull is re-elected.
LABOR’S NEW TEAM FOR WA WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A health care system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS. WE ARE UNITED. WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For Tasmania
Tasmania. Labor´s positive policies
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENI understand that many Tasmanian families are doing it tough.That is why Labor has developed a plan for Tasmania that will create opportunity and improve the living standards of Tasmanian families. I believe that when working and middle class Tasmanians are succeeding, all of Australia will prosper. Tasmanians deserve a Federal Government that will fight for them. They deserve a Government that will put their interests ahead of the interests of big business.And my commitment to Tasmanians this election is that I will do just that. I will put people ﬁrst. Over the last 12 months Labor’s Tasmania Taskforce has engaged with local communities in a frank conversation about how best to get Tasmania moving again.  Labor’s positive plan for Tasmania has been developed to reflect the findings of the Tasmanian Taskforce and the thousands of Tasmanians who made submission through this process.Labor has developed more than 100 positive policies.Our plan includes protecting Medicare, keeping medicine more affordable and investing in hospitals. It includes record investment in schools, scrapping the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees and reforming TAFE." We’ll invest $44 million in Tasmanian tourism infrastructure, delivering projects across the State.”Labor’s plan includes protecting penalty rates, scrapping the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and giving families immediate child care relief.It also includes building the infrastructure that Tasmania needs to create local jobs and drive local growth for the future.On July 2, Tasmanians will have a choice between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a tax cut to big business.I believe Labor’s plan is the right one for Tasmania, and for Tasmanians.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies atwww.100positivepolicies.org.au/.Bill Shorten
LABOR’S PLAN TO STOP THE PRIVATISATION
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they tried to introduce a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule and now they are trying to privatise Medicare services.
The Liberals are doing everything they can to wreck Medicare and take our healthcare system down the same path as America’s, where it is your credit card and not your Medicare Card that determines the quality of your health care.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal healthcare system continues to deliver good health outcomes for Tasmanians into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it. Labor will reverse the Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means an average family in Tasmania with two children will be more than $400 better off under Labor. Labor will reverse the Liberals’ plans to privatise Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class Tasmanian families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script.
This means that under Labor, medicines will be more affordable than under the Liberals.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
With Labor, hospitals in Tasmania can expect to receive around $40 million more in funding than they would under the Liberals.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments at Royal Hobart Hospital, Launceston General Hospital, North West Regional Hospital and Mersey Community Hospital.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best healthcare systems in the world.
But Australia’s healthcare system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, means that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life-saving research and care for those Tasmanians suffering from chronic disease..
These commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer all around Australia.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
Almost $1 million to deliver Youthbeat Mission Australia safety and early intervention program in North-west Tasmania.
$3 million to build a 10 bed hospice at the Allambi facility in Northern Tasmania.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
Tasmania’s future prosperity depends more than ever on the quality of its education system.
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Tasmanian student the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy and job market.
IMPROVING TASMANIAN SCHOOLS-YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan aims to put Tasmania’s schools among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in:
More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs – and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $60 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Tasmanian schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Labor will also make sure all Tasmanian students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean new and up-skilled STEM teachers for Tasmanian schools.
Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
Tasmania won’t have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university – no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee – removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at the University of Tasmania without a $100,000 debt sentence.
UTAS EXPANSION
Labor will invest $150 million so the University of Tasmania can construct two new campuses at Inveresk in Launceston and West Park in Burnie.
The projects will create 3,110 jobs, including 265 additional academic and professional jobs, and support 12,000 new students in North and North-West Tasmania.
PROTECTING TAFE, STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor knows that every student does not want to go to university.
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
LABOR’S PLAN TO PROTECT TASMANIAN JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE
Labor is investing in the job-creating infrastructure that will create local jobs and drive Tasmania’s economy for the next generation.
BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE TASMANIA NEEDS
Labor is investing in the infrastructure that Tasmania needs, including: Shared pathway between Latrobe and Devonport.
Develop rest of the Kentish Trails Masterplan.
The Hobart Airport Roundabout Upgrade.
The Circular Head Pool.
Former Kingston High Site Revitalization.
The Derwent Valley Sporting Precinct.
The Northern Midlands Fitness and Sports Centre.
The Okines Community Garden Facilities Extension.
The York Cove Precinct Plan.
The George Town Economic Development Prospectus.
The Silt Management Initiatives in York Cove.
Stage Two of the Wivenhoe Recreation Ground Lighting Project.
Upgrade of the Burnie Tennis Centre.
Delivering the Wynyard Foreshore Masterplan.
Delivering the NBN to Tasmania’s west coast communities.
Prospect Sports Complex.
Labor will establish a framework requiring a proportion of the jobs on major federally funded projects to be delivered as apprenticeships – so young Tasmanians can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
A Shorten Labor Government will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to make a further submission in favour of retaining penalty rates.
COMPLETING THE NATIONAL BROADBAND NETWORK
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Tasmania needs to create the jobs of the future.
Under Labor, up to 2 million more homes and businesses across the country will get first-rate fibre-to-the-premises than they will under the Liberals, including the West Coast of Tasmania.
DRIVING INNOVATION IN TASMANIA’S REGIONS
Labor will create a Regional Innovation Fund, which will kick-start a range of initiatives to expand the role of Tasmania’s regions in the national innovation and jobs effort.
Labor will fund the establishment of up to 20 new accelerators in universities or TAFEs in regions around the country, including in Tasmania.
This means students that live in Tasmania’s regions will get access to resources often limited to people living in the big cities.
TASMANIA TOURISM FUND
Labor’s Tasmania Tourism Infrastructure Fund will deliver a $44 million boost to tourism infrastructure investment in Tasmania. Initial commitments include:$1.3 million for the Burnie Waterfront Masterplan.
$4 million for the Three Capes Walk in south-eastern Tasmania.
$10 million to sink the ex-HMAS Tobruk off Tasmania’s north-east coast as a dive wreck.
Tasmania is the only state without a modern naval vessel wreck.
$15 million for Cradle Mountain amenities upgrades.
The remaining $13.7 million in funding will be subject to further announcements.
MIDLAND HIGHWAY
Tasmanians know that the only way their state will receive the infrastructure funding it needs to support jobs and growth is with Labor.
Labor will give back the $100 million the Liberals stole from the Midland Highway upgrades and deliver the full $600 million State and Federal commitment that Tasmanians were promised.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Labor believes Tasmania can become the renewable energy powerhouse of Australia – and we have a plan to make it happen.
Labor will provide $5 million to fast-track the development of a business case for a second Bass Strait interconnector, delivering greater energy security and more job opportunities for Tasmanians.
Subject to a positive business case and an assessment by Infrastructure Australia, up to $500 million will be made available through our Infrastructure Financing Facility for the construction of the second cable.
The project will be funded and delivered in partnership with the Tasmanian Government and the private sector.
BASSLINK
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Tasmania needs to create the jobs of the future.
Under Labor, up to 2 million more homes and businesses across the country will get first-rate fibre-to-the-premises than they will under the Liberals, including the West Coast of Tasmania.
TASMANIA TASKFORCE – DELIVERING FOR TASMANIA
For over a year, Labor’s Tasmania Taskforce has been engaging with Tasmanians in a frank conversation about how best to get our state moving again.
The Tasmania Taskforce has looked at where we are today, and more importantly where we want to be tomorrow.
Specifically, the Taskforce has focussed on: Economic Development – supporting Tasmania’s transition to growing industries, including renewable energy, boutique food production, aquaculture and eco and cultural tourism.
Employment – creating the jobs of today and the jobs of the future with particular focus on working with businesses and the community to improve opportunities in areas of high youth unemployment.
Education – expanding the skills base, knowledge and resilience of students and increasing Year 12 attainment rates to ensure the next generation are equipped to drive the new economy, as well as to provide retraining and upskilling opportunities for experienced workers.
Growth – building on the clean, green, safe lifestyle of our state and the premium reputation of Tasmanian goods and services.
Labor’s positive plan for Tasmania has been developed to reflect the findings of the Tasmanian Taskforce.
SUPPORTING TASMANIA’S FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class Tasmanian families are succeeding, Australia prospers.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
With Labor, budget repair will be fair.
Unlike the Liberals we will not be fixing Mr Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
EARLY EDUCATION AND CARE
There are 11,800 families in Tasmania that rely on the Child Care Benefit who will be better off under Labor. From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017 will also mean that many of the 14,400 families in Tasmania that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will not support the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cuts to Family Tax Benefits (FTB).
With Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
For families earning over $100,000 there will be a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
With Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
With Labor, Family Tax Benefits will be targeted to the Tasmanian families that need them most.
LIBERAL CUTS HAVE HURT TASMANIA
Under the Liberals, Tasmanians have been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to families and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Tasmanians cannot afford another three years of cuts that hurt Tasmanian families and the economy.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut $640 million from Tasmanian schools over the next 10 years.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students in Tasmania and fewer jobs for Tasmanian workers.
It also means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
The Liberals will rip $168 million from the University of Tasmania over the next five years.
If the Liberals get re-elected, students in Tasmania will be facing fees of up to $100,000 for a university degree.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have made massive cuts to Tasmanian hospitals.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care and put the health of Tasmanians at risk.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 40,000 families in Tasmania will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected. That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 33,000 single parents and single income families in Tasmania will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of Tasmania’s 106,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, many pensioners in Tasmania will lose up to $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Under the Liberals, age pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will also have their pension reduced after six weeks.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 Budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals also tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance.
These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS.
WE ARE UNITED.
WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For The Central Coast
Central Coast.Labor´s positive policies
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENA few weeks ago I came to the Central Coast to announce that Labor will protect Medicare.Labor will fight for Medicare, and we will fight for the people of the Central Coast." I believe that when middle and working class people from the Central Coast succeed, the whole region will prosper.”That’s why I will work every day to deliver for middle and working class families in this marvellous region.My commitment is to always put people first.Labor’s positive plan is the right one for the Central Coast.Our plan includes protecting Medicare, keeping medicine more affordable and investing in hospitals. We will govern for all Australia, not just the big cities, not just the people who have the money to be able to afford to go and see the doctor.Our plan includes record investment in schools, scrapping the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees and reforming TAFE, because Labor wants every child to have the same chance of succeeding at school, and in life.We will build the infrastructure that the Central Coast needs – improving local roads and building other vital community projects.Labor’s plan includes protecting penalty rates, scrapping the Government’s harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and giving families immediate child care relief.On July 2, people from the Central Coast have a clear choice: between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a tax cut to big business.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies at www.100positivepolicies.org.auBill Shorten
LABOR’S PLAN TO PROTECT CENTRAL COAST JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE
Labor is investing in the infrastructure that will create jobs and drive the Central Coast’s economy for the next generation.
INVESTING IN THE INFASTRUCTURE THE CENTRAL COAST NEEDS
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $65 million in infrastructure funding for Central Coast locals, businesses and tourists.
Labor’s Central Coast Roads Rescue Package will remedy long-standing congestion and safety issues across the region.
Labor will support: $60 million for the Central Coast Roads Rescue Package.
$2.5 million for footpaths to improve pedestrian safety and movement.
$2.5 million for stage two of the popular Ettalong foreshore project to extend the Labor-funded stage one, delivered in 2013.
$500,000 to scope the feasibility of straightening the railway line between the Central Coast and Sydney and building a new road from Woy Woy to the M1.
Labor’s investment in Central Coast roads will create hundreds of local jobs.
CENTRAL COAST MEDICAL AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $32.5 million in the Central Coast Medical and Research Institute, to be built adjacent to Gosford Hospital.
This world-class facility will create hundreds of jobs and enable local medical, nursing and allied health students to train where they live.
INNOVATION HUB AT THE CENTRAL COAST CAMPUS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE
Labor’s Regional Innovation Fund will kick-start a range of initiatives to expand the role of the Central Coast region in the national innovation and jobs effort.
Labor will fund the establishment of up to 20 new accelerators in universities or TAFEs in regions around the country, including one potentially at the University of Newcastle (Central Coast).
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
ARTS CENTRE FOR THE GOSFORD WATERFRONT
Labor will commit $20 million to build a Performing Arts Centre in Gosford, because we believe the arts belong to all Australians.
The arts are not just an important avenue for creativity – the arts sector generates jobs and brings communities together.
COMPLETING THE NBN
Labor will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s NBN mess and build the NBN Australia needs to create the jobs of the future.
Under Labor, Gosford got the real NBN and the jobs have already started to flow.
LABOR WILL STOP THE  PRIVATISATION  OF MEDICARE
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they introduced a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule and now they are trying to privatise Medicare payments.
The Liberals are doing everything they can to wreck Medicare and take our health care system down the same path as America’s, where it is your credit card and not your Medicare Card that determines the quality of your health care.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for the Central Coast into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it.
Labor will reverse the Liberal Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means an average family on the Central Coast with two children will be more than $400 better off under Labor.
We will prevent the Liberals from privatising Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class Central Coast families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script.
Under Labor, medicines will be more affordable.
HELPING CENTRAL COAST WOMEN ACCESS DRUG TREATMENT
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure that pregnant women in need of residential drug treatment to manage their addiction have better access to services.
Labor will invest $2.2 million in Kamira Alcohol and Other Drug Treatment Services in Wyong, which provides residential rehabilitation treatment for mothers and pregnant women with alcohol and drug addiction problems.
We recognise drug and alcohol dependency affects families from all walks of life – this funding will enable this facility to provide greater services to help families make positive changes in their lives.
NEW PRIMARY HEALTH CARE FACILITY
Labor will provide $2 million to fit out a new primary health care facility on the Woy Woy peninsula.
People from the Central Coast should be able to access the health care they need, when and where they need it.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
Labor will increase funding for Central Coast hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, hospitals in NSW can expect to receive around $630 million more than they would under the Liberals.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, mean that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those on the Central Coast suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include:$10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer all around Australia.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
$84 million to improve access to lifesaving technologies for Australians with type 1 diabetes.
$1.5 million to upgrade paediatric services at Wyong Hospital.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
Every child deserves to have the same chance of succeeding at school, and in life, as any other child in the country.
Improving education is the key to opportunity and to the future economic and social prosperity of our nation.
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Central Coast child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING CENTRAL COAST SCHOOLS - YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s “Your Child. Our Future” plan aims to put Australia’s schools back among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs – and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $79 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Central Coast schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Labor will also make sure all Central Coast students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean new and up-skilled STEM teachers for Central Coast schools.
Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
The Central Coast will not have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university, no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee, removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at the universities on the Central Coast, in the Hunter and in Sydney based on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
COMMONWEALTH INSTITUTE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION – GOSFORD
A Shorten Labor Government will establish a Commonwealth Institute of Higher Education to deliver new technical and higher education opportunities in Gosford.
A total of ten pilot sites will be established across Australia, in locations where need is demonstrated, and where institutions, industry and local communities are ready to implement locally tailored Institutes.
The Institutes will see universities working together with TAFEs to trial approaches tailored to local conditions, giving students the skills they need to find local jobs.
PROTECTING TAFE, STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
STRONG FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class families are succeeding, Australia succeeds.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
Labor believes in budget repair, but unlike the Liberals we will not be fixing Mr Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
CHILD CARE
Every one of the 10,090 families on the Central Coast that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off under Labor. From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017 will also mean that many of the 12,080 families on the Central Coast that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will not support the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cuts to Family Tax Benefits (FTB). With Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
For families earning over $100,000 there will be a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
With Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
LOCAL COMMUNITY PROJECTS
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a range of community projects to improve quality of life on the Central Coast.
These include:  $500,000 for the Banjo Memorial Skate Park in Wamberal.
$50,000 for the Bateau Bay PCYC for youth programs.
$1 million to build a grandstand at Edsaac Oval for the benefit of the whole community.
THE LIBERALS HAVE HURT THE  CENTRAL COAST
Under the Liberals, the Central Coast has been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to Family Tax Benefits and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
The Central Coast cannot afford another three years of cuts that hurt families and the local economy.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut almost $400 million from Central Coast schools.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students on the Central Coast..
It also means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
Over the next five years the Liberals will rip more than $1.8 billion from NSW universities, including more than $200 million from the University of Newcastle.
If the Liberals get their way, university students from the Central Coast would be facing fees of up to $100,000 for degrees.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have made massive cuts to Central Coast health facilities.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 20,000 families on the Central Coast will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 17,000 single parents and single income families on the Central Coast will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of the Central Coast’s 66,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, many pensioners from the Central Coast will lose up to $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Under the Liberals, age pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will also have their pension reduced after six weeks.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 Budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals also tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS. WE ARE UNITED. WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For Victoria
VICTORIA LABOR’S POSITIVE POLICIES
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENThis election, my commitment to the people of Victoria is that I will always put people first.Labor has a clear plan to grow the economy in a way that protects jobs and improves living standards.Labor will protect Medicare, keep the price of medicine affordable and invest in Victoria’s hospitals.We will properly fund schools, reform TAFE and scrap the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees."We will build the infrastructure that Victorians need to create well-paying jobs and drive long-term growth across the state."As the automotive industry declines, we will work with Victorian parts makers to open new markets for advanced manufacturing, here in Australia and overseas.We will protect penalty rates and scrap the Liberals’ harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits.Labor’s plan also includes giving families immediate child care relief, tackling child care waiting lists and increasing access to outside school hours’ care.I believe Labor’s positive plan is the right one for my home state, Victoria.That’s why I will work every day to deliver for middle and working class families in Victoria.Australians deserve a Federal Government with a clear plan – not just a slogan.On July 2, Victorians will have a choice between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ next round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so that Malcolm Turnbull can give a $50 billion tax cut to big business.Labor has developed more than 100 positive policies to build a fairer Australia – I invite you to read more about them at www.100positivepolicies.org.au.Bill Shorten
LABOR WILL PROTECT VICTORIAN JOBS TODAY AND CREATE THE JOBS  OF THE FUTURE
Labor is investing in the job-creating infrastructure that will create jobs and drive the Victorian economy for the next generation.
Labor is committed to ensuring every Victorian has the opportunity to work to their full capacity.
Our initiatives will create more than 5,000 real jobs for Victorians.
BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE VICTORIA NEEDS
A Shorten Labor Government will build the infrastructure that Victoria needs.
Labor will invest: $380 million to support the Melbourne Metro project.
$356 million to complete the upgrade of the M80 Ring Road, completing the final three sections of the 38 km corridor.
$510 million to upgrade the efficiency of the Monash Freeway, one of Australia’s busiest.
$120 million to boost park-and-ride capacity at high use train stations.
$220 million for the Murray Basin Rail project, upgrading Victoria’s rail freight network.
$350 million for a Victorian Regional Roads package.
$90 million to upgrade Bridge Inn Road, to serve the growing community around Mernda.
$85 million to upgrade Thompsons Road, opening up industrial areas in Melbourne’s southeast.
$67 million to build the O’Herns Road upgrade, improving freight movements through industrial areas.
$22 million for an extension to the number 11 tram route, improving access to services and reducing congestion.
$20 million for the first stage of the duplication of Craigieburn Road.
$50 million to establish a High Speed Rail Planning Authority.
BACKING SMALL BUSINESS TO CREATE LOCAL JOBS
A Shorten Labor Government will reward small businesses that are creating jobs and getting Australian jobseekers back to work.
Labor’s New Jobs Tax Cut will allow small businesses to claim a deduction of up to $20,000 to offset the wages of up to five new employees.
The jobs tax cut will be available to businesses who employ young people, carers returning back to work or older Australians.
Businesses supporting job seekers will be able to claim an additional deduction of up to $100,000 a year for hiring new staff.
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING
Labor will work with the Victorian Government to deliver new jobs in the regions worst affected by motor vehicle production closures.
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $59 million to the Manufacturing Transition Boost to ensure regions across the nation – including Geelong – continue to have strong workforces and local jobs.
This jobs package will provide pathways to new jobs for skilled workers by attracting new business investment in advanced manufacturing.
Firms will be given new incentives to diversify into new products and markets and employ automotive workers who have lost their jobs.
LOCAL JOBS FOR LOCAL PEOPLE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $68.6 million over the next four years to deliver our Local Jobs for Local People program.
This will connect people in disadvantaged communities with jobs and training opportunities, while also tackling the complex social and local issues that can keep Australians from finding work.
Local Jobs for Local People will operate in up to 20 communities across Australia in areas of high employment or entrenched disadvantage.
WORKING FUTURES
Labor will get more young people into work and keep them there by delivering real skills and real opportunities through our Working Futures program.
We will support 20,000 people per year aged between 15 and 24 through a comprehensive work and training program, setting them on the right path to ongoing high-quality jobs.
Working Futures will offer real training for real jobs.
This is in stark contrast to the Liberals’ exploitative Youth PaTH program, which subsidises employers to place jobseekers on internships without sufficient workplace protections.
REAL SKILLS GOOD JOBS
Labor will help more young people into apprenticeships by creating 10,000 new Apprentice Ready places, offering a 20-week, industry endorsed pre-apprenticeship course for trades on the National Skills Needs List.
A Shorten Labor Government will help retrenched workers gain formal recognition of their skills through an accelerated apprenticeship program to help them find their next job.
A National Skills Recognition Entitlement program will help 5,000 mature-aged, retrenched workers turn their extensive work experience into formal qualifications.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced. Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
DRIVING INNOVATION IN OUR CITIES AND OUR REGIONS
Labor has a comprehensive plan to drive innovation in our cities and our regions.
This includes: Supporting great ideas by co-investing in early stage and high potential companies through the $500 million Smart Investment Fund.
Bringing together the superannuation, venture capital and startup sectors in an Innovation Investment Partnership to identify barriers holding back investment in Australian-based venture capital funds and early-stage enterprises.
Improving access to finance for startups and micro-businesses through a partial guarantee scheme, Startup Finance.
Getting startups to help solve government problems through Challenge Platforms and support startups to compete in government tenders.
Accelerating innovation in our regions through Regional Innovation Hubs.
Reforming the innovation architecture through Innovate Australia.
Improving the flow of capital to startups through Startup Capital.
Backing our best and brightest overseas with Landing Pad hubs for Australian innovators.
COMPLETING THE NBN
A Shorten Labor Government will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s mess and build the national broadband network Australia needs to create the jobs of the future.
We will scale up the rollout of fibre-to-the-premises and phase out the rollout of fibre-to-the-node.
This will deliver fibre-to-the-premises to up to two million homes and businesses across the country that would otherwise get Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper version, including hundreds of thousands of homes and businesses in Victoria.
For example, Mernda, Doreen, North Bendigo, Geelong, Belgrave and Upwey will all be fibre-to-the-premises.
LABOR WILL STOP THE PRIVATISATION  OF MEDICARE
First they tried to introduce a GP Tax, then the Liberals tried to introduce a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The Liberals are doing all they can to destroy Medicare.
In contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for every Australian into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it. Labor will reverse the Liberal Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means that under Labor an average family in Victoria with two children will be more than $400 better off.
We will prevent the Liberals from privatising Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class Victorian families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script. Under Labor, medicines will be more affordable.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
A Shorten Labor Government will increase funding for Victorian hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, Victorian hospitals will receive $500 million more than they would under the Liberals.
This means that Goulburn Valley Health, Alfred Hospital, the Royal Women’s Hospital and all public hospitals in Victoria will be better resourced under Labor.
REVERSING CUTS TO PATHOLOGY AND IMAGING SERVICES
A Shorten Labor Government will reverse Malcolm Turnbull’s cuts to bulk billing incentives for pathology and diagnostic imaging.
Labor’s measures give pathologists and radiologists a specific incentive to bulk bill.
Without it, bulk billing will fall, co-payments will rise, and patients will be forced to pay more for tests and scans – or to skip them altogether.
PREVENTATIVE HEALTH PACKAGE
Chronic diseases are the leading cause of illness, disability and death in Australia.
Many of these diseases are due to preventable risk factors such as physical inactivity, poor nutrition, smoking and harmful use of alcohol.
Labor has developed a five-point plan to combat chronic disease:  Investing in 50 Healthy Communities nationwide, to help communities at the greatest risk of chronic disease to stay well.
Tackling obesity through Australia’s first National Physical Activity Strategy and a National Nutrition Framework.
Expanding the successful Better Health Channel into a nationwide platform for health information.
Continuing the push to reduce smoking rates, particularly in at-risk communities.
Addressing harmful use of alcohol through a National Alcohol Strategy.
A NATIONAL APPROACH TO SUICIDE PREVENTION
A Shorten Labor Government will target a 50 per cent reduction in suicides over the next 10 years.
Our National Suicide Strategy will provide a strong national commitment to reduce the suicide toll, and coordinate a focused effort across Australia.
Labor will commission Australia’s first national data-set of suicide deaths and invest $72 million over three years for 12 regional suicide pilot projects.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, means that Australia requires new and innovative approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those Victorians suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include, nationally: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer all around Australia.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
$84 million to improve access to lifesaving technologies for Australians with type 1 diabetes.
LABOR’S PLAN FOR SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES  AND TAFE
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Improving education is the key to opportunity, to innovation and to the future economic and social prosperity of our nation.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every Victorian child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING VICTORIAN SCHOOLS - YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan will put Australia’s schools back where they belong among the very best in the world.
Every student, in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs - and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade.
This includes $815 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Victorian schools in 2018 and 2019 compared to the Liberals.
Whether your child is studying at Ballarat High School or at Strathmore Secondary College, they will get more targeted, needs-based investments under Labor.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
Victoria will not have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university – no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee - removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at La Trobe or Monash University based on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
PROTECTING TAFE - STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Labor will also make sure all Victorian students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for our future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support a further 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean around 6,500 new or up-skilled STEM teachers for Victorian schools.
Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
STRONG FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class families are succeeding, Australia succeeds.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
Labor believes in budget repair, but we will not be fixing the Liberals’ budget mess by attacking the family budget.
CHILD CARE
Every one of the 139,580 families in Victoria that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off under Labor.
From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Many of the 185,770 families in Victoria that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year with Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will oppose the Government’s harsh cuts to Family Tax Benefits.
Under Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
Families earning over $100,000 will see a modest reduction in their FTB-A end of year supplement.
Under Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
LOCAL COMMUNITY PROJECTS
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a range of community projects to improve quality of life for the people of Victoria.
These include: $5 million to deliver the Colac Early Years Children’s Centre, providing primary and tertiary health and wellbeing services to young children and their families.
$5 million to fund a major upgrade to the Ballarat Sports and Event Centre project.
$2 million to upgrade car parking at Maroondah Hospital, building more than 300 new spaces to ease chronic congestion.
$6 million for the Wheatsheaf Community Hub in Glenroy – this facility will include a children’s centre, a modern local library, multipurpose community meeting rooms and a Neighbourhood House.
$2 million to redevelop the Bendigo Tennis Centre and support the cultivation of future tennis stars in regional Victoria.
$1.4 million to expand the capacity of the Gisborne Oaks Residential Aged Care Facility to address urgent demand for dementia care in Macedon Ranges region.
THE LIBERALS HAVE HURT VICTORIA
Under the Liberals, Victorians have been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to Family Tax Benefits and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Victorians can’t afford another three years of cuts and chaos.
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT
Under the Liberals the youth unemployment rate in Victoria has remained above 12 per cent, more than double the national unemployment rate.
The number of young people in job training across the country has plummeted, and there are now an astonishing 30,000 fewer apprentices in Victoria than there were in 2013.
Labor is committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices, so young people from all across Victoria can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut more than $7.1 billion from Victorian schools.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students in Victoria.
It also means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from lowsocio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
Since 2013, the Liberals have ripped nearly $1.5 billion from Victorian universities.
If the Liberals get their way, students in Victoria would be facing fees of up to $100,000 for their university degrees.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have cut billions from Victorian hospitals.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 379,000 families in Victoria will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 308,000 single parents and single income families in Victoria will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of Victoria’s more than one million pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, pensioners in Victoria who are trying to study will lose $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Age Pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will have their pension reduced after six weeks under the Liberals.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals also tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance.
These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS. WE ARE UNITED. WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For South Australia
SOUTH AUSTRALIA LABOR’S POSITIVE POLICIES
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTEN With some of Australia’s best known food and wine regions, a strong manufacturing base and vibrant communities, the future for South Australia is a bright one.But South Australia is going through a difficult transition. I know that many South Australians are anxious about their future, and their children’s future.That is why Labor’s plan backs South Australian jobs." Our plan secures the long-term future of advanced manufacturing, strengthens local steelmakers like Arrium and ensures our submarines are built here, in Adelaide.”We will build the infrastructure – like AdeLINK – that South Australia needs to create jobs and drive growth into the future.Labor will finish the NBN so that South Australian businesses and households can be engaged in the digital economy.Our plan includes record investment in South Australian schools, scrapping the Liberals’ $100,000 degrees and reforming TAFE.Labor will protect Medicare, keep medicine more affordable and invest in hospitals.We will protect penalty rates, scrap the Government’s harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and give families immediate child care relief.I am committed to working every day to ensuring that South Australian families get the opportunity to build a decent life.On July 2, South Australians have a clear choice: between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a tax cut to big business.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies atwww.100positivepolicies.org.au.Bill Shorten
Protecting South Australian jobs today and creating the jobs of the future
Labor will invest in the job-creating infrastructure and manufacturing that will create local jobs and drive South Australia’s economy for the next generation.
Labor’s investments will support thousands of South Australians employed on projects important to South Australia, and support over 200 new apprentices in the State.
Labor will build the infrastructure today, and train the workforce of the future, supported by our investments in TAFE, tradie support and the Apprentice Ready program.
ADELINK
Adelaide needs a public transport system which supports the city’s future.
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $500 million to deliver the initial stages of the AdeLINK tram project, a project that will create 2,000 local jobs extending over four years.
Labor’s commitment, together with additional funding from the State Government, will leverage private sector investment.
It will improve quality of life, boost productivity and decrease congestion for Adelaide residents.
Labor’s apprenticeship commitment will see up to 200 new apprentices working on this project.
BACKING AUSTRALIAN STEEL
Australia cannot be the only advanced economy in the world to let its steel industry die.
Labor will secure more than 3,500 South Australian jobs and lock in a strong steel future for Australian steel through a targeted investment in Arrium.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $100 million in targeted grants and financing as part of the Steel Reserve, with the South Australian Government providing an additional $50 million.
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING
Labor will work with the South Australian Government to protect and grow new local jobs in the regions worst affected by motor vehicle production closures.
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $59 million to the Manufacturing Transition Boost package.
This jobs package will provide support for automotive supplier and other firms to diversify and improve competitiveness, supporting local jobs and providing new jobs for skilled workers.
Firms will be given new incentives and support to diversify into new products and markets and employ automotive workers who have lost their jobs.
A STRONG, SUSTAINABLE SHIPPING INDUSTRY
Labor is the only party to have been consistently committed to a strong and sustainable shipbuilding industry, with Adelaide at its core.
A Shorten Labor Government will deliver: The construction of nine Future Frigates centred in Adelaide, supporting 2,000 shipbuilding jobs.
The construction of 12 Offshore Patrol Vessels to begin in Adelaide in 2018, before being transferred to Western Australia in 2020.
The construction of 12 Future Submarines, creating 2,800 jobs and supporting a supply chain of at least 1,000 businesses, with a minimum of 70 per cent of the work done in Australia.
These projects will be undertaken as a continuous rolling build, to ensure Australia’s shipyards no longer suffer booms and busts and can build capacity and efficiency over time.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
NEW JOBS TAX CUT
Under Labor’s New Jobs Tax Cut, small businesses will be able to claim a tax deduction of up to $20,000 per worker to offset the wages of up to five new employees.
Just like the previous Labor Government’s instant asset write-off, businesses will be able to claim the New Jobs Tax Cut as part of their regular tax return.
This minimises paperwork for busy employers.
This represents a $257 million investment in getting older Australians, parents, carers and younger Australians back to work.
It will help up to 30,000 Australians find a job each year.
Our New Jobs Tax Cut will reward South Australian small businesses that invest in jobs and do their bit to get these Australians back to into work.
GAWLER RAIL LINE ELECTRIFICATION
Labor will invest $76 million to fast track the Gawler Rail Line electrification, enabling the full project to start one year earlier and creating 300 local jobs, including up to 30 new apprentices.
LOCAL JOBS FOR LOCAL PEOPLE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $68.6 million over the next four years to deliver our Local Jobs for Local People program.
This will connect people in disadvantaged communities with jobs and training opportunities, while tackling the complex social and local issues that can keep Australians from finding work.
Local Jobs for Local People will operate in up to 20 communities across Australia in areas of high unemployment or entrenched disadvantage.
WORKING FUTURES
Labor will get more young people into work and keep them there by delivering real skills and real opportunities through our Working Futures program.
We will support 20,000 people per year aged between 15 and 24 through a comprehensive work and training program that sets them on the right path to ongoing quality jobs.
Working Futures will offer real training for real jobs.
This is in stark contrast to the Liberals’ exploitative Youth PaTH program, which subsidises employers to place jobseekers on internships without sufficient protections.
APPRENTICESHIPS
Labor will help more young people into apprenticeships by creating 10,000 new Apprentice Ready places.
Labor will help retrenched workers gain formal recognition of their skills through accelerated apprenticeships so they can find their next job.
The Apprentice Ready program will offer a 20-week, industry endorsed pre-apprenticeship course for trades on the National Skills Needs List.
Labor is committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices – so young South Australians can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
COMPLETING THE NBN
A Shorten Labor Government will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s mess and build the National Broadband Network Australia needs to create the jobs of the future.
Labor will scale up the rollout of fibre-to-the-premises and phase out the rollout of fibre-to-the-node.
This will deliver fibre-to-the-premises to up to two million homes and businesses across the country that would otherwise get Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper version, including homes and business in Elizabeth, Woodville, Adelaide CBD and Noarlunga.
DRIVING INNOVATION
Labor has a comprehensive plan to drive innovation in our cities and our regions.
This includes: Backing in great ideas through co-investing in early stage and high potential companies through the $500 million Smart Investment Fund.
Bringing together the superannuation, venture capital and startup sectors in an Innovation Investment Partnership to identify barriers holding back investment in Australian-based venture capital funds and early-stage enterprises.
Improving access to finance for startups and micro-businesses through a partial guarantee scheme, Startup Finance.
Getting startups to help solve government problems through Challenge Platforms and support startups to compete in government tenders.
Accelerating innovation in our regions through Regional Innovation Hubs.
Reforming the innovation architecture through Innovate Australia.
Improving the flow of capital to startups through Startup Capital.
Backing our best and brightest overseas through a Landing Pad for Australian innovators.
WORKING WOMEN’S CENTRES
Working Women’s Centres provide specialist advice and advocacy, produce educational materials, deliver community education sessions and provide advice to government on a range of female workforce issues.
The Liberals’ cuts threaten the free, specialist employment advice service for vulnerable women provided by these facilities.
A Shorten Labor Government will keep them open – including the Working Women’s Centre in Adelaide.
Labor will stop the privatization of medicare
First the Liberals tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they introduced a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the Medicare Benefits Schedule and now they are trying to privatise Medicare payments.
The Liberals are doing everything they can to wreck Medicare and take our health care system down the same path as America’s, where it is your credit card and not your Medicare Card that determines the quality of your health care.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for South Australia into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it.
Labor will reverse the Liberal Government’s freeze on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means an average family in South Australia with two children will be more than $400 better off under Labor.
We will prevent the Liberals from privatising Medicare.
SCRAPPING THE LIBERALS’ MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class families in South Australia.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script.
Under Labor, medicines will be more affordable.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
Labor will increase funding for South Australian hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, hospitals in South Australia can expect to receive around $140 million more than they would under the Liberals.
This means better services and shorter wait times at South Australian hospitals.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, means that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll-out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those in South Australia suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer all around Australia.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
$84 million to improve access to lifesaving technologies for Australians with type 1 diabetes.
Labor´s plan for South Australian Schools, universities and tafe
Every child deserves to have the same chance of succeeding at school, and in life, as any other child in the country.
Improving education is the key to opportunity and to the future economic and social prosperity of South Australia.
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments we need to give every South Australian child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS - YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan aims to make South Australian schools among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs – and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $355 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for South Australian schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
South Australia will not have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000 degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university, no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee, removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at universities like Flinders University, the University of Adelaide and the University of South Australia based on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHS
Labor will make sure all South Australian students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean new and up-skilled STEM teachers for South Australian schools.
Labor will provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
PROTECTING TAFE – STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
Supporting families and communities
Labor believes that when middle and working class South Australian families are succeeding, all of South Australia will prosper.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
With Labor, budget repair will be fair.
Unlike the Liberals, we will not be fixing Mr Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
EARLY EDUCATION AND CARE
There are 41,220 families in South Australia that rely on the Child Care Benefit who will be better off under Labor.
From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017 will mean that many of the 53,230 families in South Australia that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut Paid Parental Leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will reverse the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cuts to Family Tax Benefits (FTB).
With Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
For families earning over $100,000 there will be a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
With Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
With Labor, Family Tax Benefits will be targeted to the South Australian families that need them most.
INVESTING IN SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITIES
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a range of community projects to improve quality of life for the people of South Australia.
These include: $80 million for the Northern Adelaide Irrigation Scheme.
$44 million for flood mitigation works in the urban catchments of Brown Hill and Keswick Creeks.
$6.6 million for the refurbishment of the Thebarton Oval precinct, home of the South Australian Amateur Football League.
$4 million to build the St Clair Recreation Precinct, multi-use indoor recreation centre and associated facilities for western Adelaide.
$1.5 million to support the construction of the Kilburn Sporting Complex.
$500,000 to upgrade the Yatala Vale Road and Golden Grove Road junction in Adelaide’s northeast
$200,000 to fix fencing on the Goodwood and Millswood Freight Train lines.
$200,000 for safety and fencing upgrades to improve pedestrian access to Millswood train station.
Liberal cuts in South Australia
Under the Liberals, South Australians have been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to families and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
South Australians cannot afford another three years of cuts that hurt South Australian families and the economy.
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT
Under the Liberals the youth unemployment rate in South Australia has grown by more than a percentage point, and is now the second highest in the country.
The number of young people in job training across the country has plummeted, and there are now an astonishing 14,000 fewer apprentices in South Australia than there were in 2013.
Labor is committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices, so young people from all across South Australia can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
CUTS TO SOUTH AUSTRALIAN AUTOMOTIVE MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
The Liberals took a cut to automotive industry support of $500 million to the last election, having been warned by industry, unions and Labor that this would force Holden and other manufacturers to close.
Upon forming government, the Liberals refused to drop their planned cuts, even though Labor fought against them in Parliament and the industry called for certainty of support from government.
In response to Holden and Toyota’s closure announcement, the Liberals increased targeted support for the diversification of automotive supply chain firms by only $3 million, ensuring these supply chain firms, their workers as well as those at Holden would be left high and dry by the Liberal Government.
CUTS TO SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut $2 billion from South Australian schools over the next 10 years.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students in South Australia and fewer jobs for South Australian education workers.
It means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO SOUTH AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES
The Liberals will rip $463 million from South Australian universities over the next five years.
If the Liberals get re-elected, students in South Australia will be facing fees of up to $100,000 for a university degree.
CUTS TO SOUTH AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES
More than 117,000 families in South Australia will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected. That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 95,000 single parents and single income families in South Australia will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
Under the Liberals, single parents whose youngest child is 13 or over will have their Family Tax Benefit reduced by around $1,785, and those whose youngest is aged 16-19 and in full time school will lose the full payment of $2,785.
CUTS TO SOUTH AUSTRALIAN PENSIONERS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of South Australia’s 352,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, many pensioners in South Australia will lose up to $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Under the Liberals, age pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will have their pension reduced after six weeks.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE SOUTH AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 Budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance.
These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
CUTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES
The Liberals cut $52 million from assistance grants to South Australian councils in the 2014 Budget.
These cuts are ongoing, and significantly impact on the ability of councils in South Australia to deliver basic community services like child care and libraries.
It has led to cuts in road maintenance, and has cost local jobs.
The Liberals cut supplementary local roads funding for South Australian councils in the 2014 Budget.
This represented a loss of $18 million per year to sparsely populated councils with many local roads to maintain.
This was on top of the financial assistance grants.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS.
WE ARE UNITED.
WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For the NT
Northern Territory. Labor´s positive policies
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENEvery year, hundreds of thousands of visitors travel to the Top End to experience the beautiful landscapes, cultures and traditions of the Northern Territory.But the Territory needs more than a healthy tourism industry to secure a prosperous future.That is why I believe that Labor’s plan is the right one for the Territory, because Labor’s plan grows the economy in a way that protects jobs and improves living standards."Labor will build the infrastructure that the Territory needs to create jobs and drive growth into the future."We will finish the NBN so that businesses and households can engage in the digital economy.Labor’s plan includes record investment in Territory schools; scrapping the Liberals’ $100,000 degrees; and reforming TAFE.Importantly, Labor has made a commitment to Indigenous students.Our plan includes protecting Medicare, keeping medicine affordable and investing in hospitals.Labor will protect penalty rates, scrap the Government’s harsh and unfair cuts to Paid Parental Leave and Family Tax Benefits and give families immediate child care relief.I believe that when working and middle class families prosper, all Australians prosper. That is why I am committed to working every single day to ensuring that every Territory family gets the opportunity to build a decent life.On July 2, Territorians have a clear choice: Labor’s positive plan, or the Liberals’ plan for another round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so Malcolm Turnbull can give a $50 billion tax cut to big business.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies atwww.100positivepolicies.org.au.Bill Shorten
PROTECTING NORTHERN TERRITORY JOBS TODAY AND CREATING THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE
Labor will invest in the job-creating infrastructure that will create local jobs and drive the Territory’s economy for the next generation.
Labor has also designed a suite of policies to help prepare Territorians for the jobs of the future.
BUILDING JOB-CREATING INFRASTRUCTURE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $58 million in an infrastructure package that will create jobs and drive growth in the Territory.
Labor’s commitments include: $12.2 million for a Darwin Rural Area anti-flooding package.
$10 million for the Numbulwar to Ngukurr road.
$2.5 million for Waterhouse River bridge and raised approaches.
$10 million for the Sandover Highway in the Barkly Region.
$500,000 for the Emu Point access road.
$15 million for the Santa Theresa to Alice Springs road.
$8 million for the Papunya to Haasts Bluff road.
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE FUND
A Shorten Labor Government will help northern Australia build the tourism infrastructure it needs to harness the huge economic potential of the Asian tourism boom, creating jobs and driving growth in our regions for decades to come.
Labor will allocate $1 billion from the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility to a Northern Australia Tourism Infrastructure Fund, to boost partnerships with the tourism sector and provide incentives for investment in new and upgraded tourism infrastructure across the north.
The following will be eligible for funding:  Projects targeting the expanding Asian tourism market.
Projects promoting Australia’s natural environment such as the Great Barrier Reef.
Eco-tourism.
Indigenous tourism ventures.
Event-based facilities including stadia and convention centres.
Transport and access upgrades, including for ports and airports.
NORTHERN TERRITORY BUSINESS ADVISORY COUNCIL
A Shorten Labor Government will create a new Business Advisory Council on the Northern Territory to develop and deliver a long-term plan for growth.
The Council will take a multifaceted approach to development, working with different industry sectors including the pastoral, agricultural, tourism and mining industries.
Labor wants to ensure Territorians can harness the benefits of the current investment boom in resource projects like the Inpex LNG plant and the ramping up of Defence projects.
The Business Advisory Council will provide advice on the Territory’s economic development, including developing economic and social infrastructure, maximising local industry participation in government projects and improving access to foreign markets.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers to be forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
NEW JOBS TAX CUT
Under Labor’s New Jobs Tax Cut, small businesses will be able to claim a tax deduction of up to $20,000 per worker to offset the wages of up to five new employees.
Just like the previous Labor Government’s instant asset write-off, businesses will be able to claim the New Jobs Tax Cut as part of their regular tax return.
This represents a $257 million investment in getting older Australians, parents, carers and younger Australians back to work.
It will help up to 30,000 Australians find a job each year.
Our New Jobs Tax Cut will reward small businesses that invest in jobs and do their bit to get these Australians back to into work.
LOCAL JOBS FOR LOCAL PEOPLE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $68.6 million over the next four years to deliver our Local Jobs for Local People program.
This will connect people in disadvantaged communities with jobs and training opportunities, while also tackling the complex social and local issues that can keep Australians from finding work.
Local Jobs for Local People will operate in up to 20 communities across Australia in areas of high employment or entrenched disadvantage
WORKING FUTURES
Labor will get more young people into work and keep them there by delivering real skills and real opportunities through our Working Futures program.
We will support 20,000 people per year aged between 15 and 24 through a comprehensive work and training program that sets them on the right path to ongoing quality jobs. Working Futures will offer real training for real jobs.
This is in stark contrast to the Liberals’ exploitative Youth PaTH program, which subsidises employers to place jobseekers on internships without sufficient protections.
INDIGENOUS RANGERS
A Shorten Labor Government will double the number of Indigenous rangers employed under the Indigenous Rangers – Working on Country Program, boosting jobs and environmental stewardship in remote areas.
The Working on Country program was established in 2007 and currently employs 775 Indigenous people in communities across Australia.
Under Labor that number will double to 1,550 Indigenous rangers by 2020-21.
WORKING WOMEN’S CENTRES
Working Women’s Centres provide specialist advice and advocacy and produce educational materials, deliver community education sessions and provide advice to government on a range of female workforce issues.
The Liberals’ cuts threaten the free, specialist employment advice service for vulnerable women provided by these facilities.
A Shorten Labor Government will keep them open – including the two working women’s centres in Darwin and Alice Springs.
THE DEFENCE COMMUNITY
The Territory has a long history of supporting Australia’s Defence Forces, and the presence of defence personnel and their families continue to play a major role in the Top End economy.
The 2016 Defence White Paper outlines $20 billion in additional spending on Northern Territory defence facilities over the next two decades.
Labor supports these commitments, understanding the benefits for the local community including local industry and small business.
It was under Labor in 2011 that Australia and the United States agreed to the Force Posture Initiatives in the Territory, which once fully realised will see 2,500 personnel and equipment rotate through Australia, and US aircraft making regular visits to our northern air bases for exercises and training.
This will be a significant boost to the Territory economy, estimated to be worth $5,000 per marine, per year.
BUILDING STRONG REMOTE COMMUNITIES
Labor is committed to working with Indigenous people living in outstations to build strong remote communities and to create opportunities for economic development.
As the majority landowners across the Territory, Labor is committed to working with Indigenous Australians in a joint project of development for the Northern Territory.
APPRENTICESHIPS
Labor will help more young people into apprenticeships by creating 10,000 new Apprentice Ready places.
Labor will also help retrenched workers gain formal recognition of their skills through accelerated apprenticeships so they can find their next job.
The Apprentice Ready program will offer a 20-week, industry endorsed pre-apprenticeship course for trades on the National Skills Needs List.
Labor is also committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices – so young Territorians can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future
THE NATIONAL BROADBAND NETWORK
A Shorten Labor Government will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s mess and build the National Broadband Network the Northern Territory needs to create the jobs of the future.
Labor will scale up the rollout of fibre-to-the-premises and phase out the rollout of fibre-to-the-node.
This will deliver fibre-to-the-premises to up to two million homes and businesses across the country that would otherwise get Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper version.
Labor will also commission Infrastructure Australia to manage the development of a plan that outlines how and when the parts of Australia left with Mr Turnbull’s second-rate NBN – such as Alice Springs and Tennant Creek – should be transitioned to fibre-to-the-premises.
DRIVING INNOVATION
Labor has a comprehensive plan to drive innovation in our cities and our regions.
This includes:  Backing in great ideas through co-investing in early stage and high potential companies through the $500 million Smart Investment Fund.
Bringing together the superannuation, venture capital and start-up sectors in an Innovation Investment Partnership to identify barriers holding back investment in Australian-based venture capital funds and early-stage enterprises.
Improving access to finance for start-ups and micro-businesses through a partial guarantee scheme, Start-up Finance.
Getting start-ups to help solve government problems through Challenge Platforms and support start-ups to compete in government tenders.
Accelerating innovation in our regions through Regional Innovation Hubs.
Reforming the innovation architecture through Innovate Australia.
Improving the flow of capital to start-ups through Start-up Capital.
Backing our best and brightest overseas through a Landing Pad for Australian innovators.
LABOR WILL SAVE  MEDICARE
First the Liberals tried to introduce a GP Tax, then they introduced a GP Tax by stealth by freezing indexation of the Medicare Benefits Schedule and now they are trying to privatise Medicare payments.
The Liberals are doing everything they can to wreck Medicare and take our health care system down the same path as America’s, where it is your credit card and not your Medicare Card that determines the quality of your health care.
By contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver good health outcomes for the Northern Territory into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it.
Labor will reverse the Liberal Government’s freeze on the indexation of the Medicare Benefits Schedule. This means an average family in the Territory with two children will be around $400 better off under Labor.
We will prevent the Liberals from privatising Medicare.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
Labor will increase funding for Territory hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, hospitals in the Territory can expect to receive around $20 million more than they would under the Liberals.
This means better services and shorter wait times at Territory hospitals.
CLOSING THE GAP IN INDIGENOUS HEALTH
A Shorten Labor Government will continue the work of the previous Labor Government and work to close the gap on Indigenous health outcomes.
Labor will provide $5.5 million a year to roll out the Deadly Choices initiative across the country.
Labor will convene a National Taskforce on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Kidney Disease as a priority to look for holistic solutions to the current crisis.
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $9.5 million to close the gap in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander vision loss.
THE FIRST TERRITORY PET SCANNER AND CYCLOTRON
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $15 million to fund the Territory’s first PET scanner and associated equipment at the Alan Walker Cancer Care Centre.
The Territory is the only Australian state or territory without a PET scanner, forcing Territorians with cancer to travel interstate for this potentially lifesaving treatment.
DANILA DILBA CLINICS IN THE GREATER DARWIN REGION
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $1.8 million to establish two new Danila Dilba Health Service clinics in Rapid Creek and Coolalinga.
Danila Dilba provides vital primary health care and comprehensive community services to over 15,000 Indigenous Australians every year through their five existing locations.
SCRAPPING THE LIBERALS’ MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class families in the Territory.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script. Under Labor, medicines will be more affordable.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, all mean that Australia requires new approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop, pilot and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care for those in the Territory suffering from chronic disease.
These commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer. in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.v
$84 million to improve access to lifesaving technologies for Australians with type 1 diabetes.
INVESTING IN NORTHERN TERRITORY SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITIES AND TAFE
Every child deserves to have the same chance of succeeding at school, and in life, as any other child in the country.
Improving education is the key to opportunity and to the future economic and social prosperity of the Territory.
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.
Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments the Territory needs to give every Territory child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy.
IMPROVING TERRITORY SCHOOLS - YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan aims to make Territory schools among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs - and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $100 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Territory schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
One hundred Indigenous teaching scholarships will be provided by Labor to increase the number of Indigenous teachers and provide role models for students.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHEMATICS
Labor will also make sure all Territory students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Nationally, Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill.
This will mean new and up-skilled STEM teachers for Territory schools.
Labor will also provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses will do so without a HECS debt.
SUPPORTING A NEW GENERATION OF YOUNG INDIGENOUS LEADERS
A Shorten Labor Government will boost Territory Indigenous students’ access to education and leadership opportunities by investing in the AFL Michael Long Learning and Leadership Centre’s full-time Indigenous training facility.
Labor will invest $8.4 million to create more than 7,000 new spots in the Stars Foundation mentoring program for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander girls across Australia.
The Stars Foundation program links students with full-time mentors, and aims to inspire and engage young women and girls in a bid to improve school attendance and Year 12 attainment.
The program also plays a key role in addressing health issues and social wellbeing.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
The Territory will not have a strong economy if students are forced to pay $100,000 for university degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university, no matter how bright they are. Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee, removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at universities like Charles Darwin University on good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
PROTECTING TAFE – STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee that will ensure a minimum proportion of vocational education funding stays with TAFE.
Labor will also undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure the system is meeting the needs of students and employers, weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
SUPPORTING FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
Labor believes that when middle and working class Territory families are succeeding, all of the Territory will prosper.
That is why Labor has a plan to protect the living standards of middle and working class families.
With Labor, budget repair will be fair.
Unlike the Liberals we will not be fixing Mr Turnbull’s budget mess by attacking the family budget.
EARLY EDUCATION AND CARE
There are 3,350 families in the Territory that rely on the Child Care Benefit who will be better off under Labor. From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017 will also mean that many of the 6,310 families in the Territory that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will reverse the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s cuts to Family Tax Benefits (FTB).
With Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at  current rates.
For families earning over $100,000 there will be a modest reduction of 50 per cent of their FTB-A end of year supplement.
With Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
With Labor, Family Tax Benefits will be targeted to the Territory families that need them most.
INVESTING IN NORTHERN TERRITORY COMMUNITIES
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a range of community projects to improve quality of life for the people of the Territory.
These include: $10 million for the Darwin Rural Area Pool and Leisure/Sports Centre.
$1.5 million to upgrade the Tennant Creek Hospital operating theatre.
$1 million to upgrade Darwin Entertainment Centre.
$250,000 for the Elizabeth River Boat Ramp infrastructure.
LIBERAL CUTS IN THE  NORTHERN TERRITORY
CUTS TO NORTHERN TERRITORY SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut $325 million from Territory schools over the next 10 years.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students in the Territory and fewer jobs for Territory education workers.
It also means Indigenous students, students with disability or additional learning needs and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
CUTS TO NORTHERN TERRITORY UNIVERSITIES
The Liberals will rip around $56 million from the Territory’s university – Charles Darwin University – over the next five years.
If the Liberals get re-elected, students in the Territory will be facing fees of up to $100,000 for a university degree.
CUTS TO NORTHERN TERRITORY HOSPITALS
The Liberals have made massive cuts to Territory hospitals.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care and put the health of Territorians at risk.
CUTS TO NORTHERN TERRITORY FAMILIES
More than 17,600 families in the Territory will lose their full Family Tax Benefit A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 15,500 single parents and single income families in the Territory will lose their Family Tax Benefit B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
Under the Liberals, single parents whose youngest child is 13 or over will have their Family Tax Benefit reduced by around $1,785, and those whose youngest is aged 16-19 and in full time school will lose the full payment of $2,785
CUTS TO NORTHERN TERRITORY PENSIONERS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of the Territory’s 25,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, many pensioners in the Territory will lose up to $1,600 because of the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
Under the Liberals, age pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will also have their pension reduced after six weeks.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE NORTHERN TERRITORY JOBSEEKERS
In their 2014 Budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals also tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance. These measures would have pushed young people into poverty.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS.
WE ARE UNITED.
WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor’s Plan To Close The Gap
A Shorten Labor Government will reset relationships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians in a renewed push to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
It was Labor that created the Close the Gap framework, and only Labor has a clear plan to meet the ambitious targets we designed when last we were in government.
Addressing Indigenous disadvantage will not happen in one term of government.
This is a multigenerational task and it is critical that we continue to build on the progress we have made to date.
After three years in which the Liberals have sidelined the voices of Aboriginal people, slashed funding for community controlled services and neglected the Closing the Gap Framework, Labor has put forward a series of positive policies to help close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
Labor’s positive policies include: Funding of $15 million for the National Congress of Australia’s First Peoples to provide a national voice for Indigenous Australians
Replacing the Liberals’ failed Indigenous Advancement Strategy with a fairer approach to funding Indigenous services that clearly aligns with the Closing the Gap framework.
Setting new Closing the Gap targets on justice, higher education and disability.
Increasing support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services.
Preventing and addressing family violence will be a key priority.
Reforming the way fines are collected to reduce incarceration.
Establishing a Kidney Health Taskforce to address gaps in service provision for people with chronic kidney disease.
Rolling out the Deadly Choices program to help Indigenous Australians make healthy lifestyle choices.
Closing the gap in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander vision loss.
Investing more than $100 million to support Indigenous students to succeed at school and engaging young Indigenous girls and boys in education through mentoring
Investing $57 million in Indigenous Child and Family Centres.
These investments will help improve early childhood outcomes, health outcomes, education and employment outcomes, as we drive a new agenda for tackling the outrageously high levels of Indigenous incarceration and victimisation.
Most importantly – unlike the Liberals – Labor is committed to working in a meaningful partnership with Indigenous Australians to close the gap and improve outcomes for Indigenous Australians.
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Plan For Queensland
Queensland Policies
LABOR’S POSITIVE
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENQueensland is an economic powerhouse – a great state, and the birthplace of the Australian Labor Party.Queensland’s economy is transitioning, and as the mining construction boom tapers off Labor has a clear plan to transition the Queensland economy in a way that protects jobs and improves living standards." We will build the infrastructure that Queensland needs to generate well-paying jobs and drive long-term growth across the state."Labor will invest in the people of Queensland, understanding that when middle and working class Queenslanders are succeeding, the whole of Australia will prosper.Queensland had to withstand the shocking cuts of the Newman State Government, compounded by the Abbott-Turnbull cuts from Canberra.A Shorten Labor Government will protect Medicare, keep the price of medicine affordable and invest in Queensland’s hospitals.Labor will properly fund schools, reform TAFE and scrap the Liberals’ plans for $100,000 degrees – knowing that we cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system.Labor will protect Queensland jobs today and create the jobs of the future.Labor has developed more than 100 positive policies to build a fairer Australia – I invite you to read more about them at  www.100positivepolicies.org.au.On July 2, the people of Queensland will have a choice between Labor’s positive plan and the Liberals’ next round of harsh and unfair cuts – all so that Malcolm Turnbull can give a $50 billion tax cut to big business.This election, my commitment to the people of Queensland is that I will always put people first.Bill Shorten
Labor will protect Queensland jobs today and create the jobs of the future
Labor is committed to ensuring everyone in Queensland has the opportunity to work to their full capacity, from the Far North to the Gold Coast, and right across the outback.
BACKING SMALL BUSINESS TO CREATE LOCAL JOBS
Under Labor’s New Jobs Tax Cut, small businesses in Queensland will be able to claim a tax deduction of up to $20,000 per worker to offset the wages of up to five new employees.
Just like the previous Labor Government’s instant asset write-off, businesses will be able to claim the New Jobs Tax Cut as part of their regular tax return.
This minimises paperwork for busy employers. This represents a $257 million investment in getting older Australians, parents, carers and younger Australians back to work.
It will help up to 30,000 Australians find a job each year.
Our New Jobs Tax Cut will reward Queensland small businesses that invest in jobs and do their bit to get these Australians back into work.
PROTECTING THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
A Shorten Labor Government will act to protect the Great Barrier Reef, and the 70,000 jobs it supports, from the disastrous effects of climate change and other environmental threats.
Since 1985, the Reef has lost 50 per cent of its hard coral cover.
The Reef is under pressure from poor water quality (nutrients, sediments and pesticides), coastal development, extreme weather events, including freshwater inundation, ocean acidification and outbreaks of crown-of-thorns starfish.
Labor will implement our Great Barrier Reef Plan – a long-term, coordinated and properly resourced strategy. It will be supported by a fund of $500 million over five years.
WORKING FUTURES
Labor will get more young people into work – and help to keep them there, by delivering real skills and real opportunities through our Working Futures program.
We will support 20,000 people per year aged between 15 and 24 to complete a comprehensive work and training program, setting them on the right path to high-quality and long-lasting jobs.
Working Futures will offer real training for real jobs.
This is in stark contrast to the Liberals’ exploitative Youth PaTH program, which subsidises employers to place jobseekers on internships without proper workplace protections.
REAL SKILLS, GOOD JOBS
Labor will help more young people into apprenticeships by creating 10,000 new Apprentice Ready places, offering a 20-week, industry endorsed pre-apprenticeship course for trades on the National Skills Needs List.
A Shorten Labor Government will help retrenched workers to gain formal recognition of their skills through an accelerated apprenticeship program to help them find their next job.
A National Skills Recognition Entitlement program will help 5,000 mature-aged, retrenched workers turn their extensive work experience into formal qualifications.
WORKING WOMEN’S CENTRES
Working Women’s Centres provide specialist employment advice for vulnerable women, including producing educational materials, delivering community education sessions and providing advice on a range of female workforce issues.
The Liberals’ cuts threaten this specialist service.
A Shorten Labor Government will keep them open – including the working women’s centre in Brisbane.
COMPLETING THE NBN
A Shorten Labor Government will fix Malcolm Turnbull’s mess and build the national broadband network that Australia needs to create the jobs of the future.
We will scale up the rollout of fibre-to-the-premises and phase out the rollout of fibre-to-the-node.
This will deliver fibre-to-the-premises to up to two million homes and businesses across the country that are still waiting for Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper version, including hundreds of thousands of homes and businesses across Queensland – Gladstone, Morayfield, North Mackay, Mango Hill, and Shailer Park will all get world class fibre-to-the-premises broadband.
PROTECTING PENALTY RATES
It is clear that the Liberals want to see weekend penalty rates reduced.
Labor does not want some of our lowest paid workers being forced to take a pay cut.
Labor will intervene in proceedings in the Fair Work Commission to protect weekend penalty rates.
LOCAL JOBS FOR LOCAL PEOPLE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $68.6 million over the next four years to deliver our Local Jobs for Local People program, connecting people in disadvantaged communities with jobs and training opportunities, while tackling the complex social and local issues that can keep Australians from finding work.
Local Jobs for Local People will operate in up to 20 communities across Australia in areas of high employment or entrenched disadvantage.
INDIGENOUS RANGERS
A Shorten Labor Government will double the number of Indigenous rangers employed under the Indigenous Rangers – Working on Country program, boosting jobs and environmental stewardship in remote areas.
The Working on Country program was established in 2007 and currently employs 775 Indigenous people in communities across Australia. Under Labor that number will double to 1,550 Indigenous rangers by 2020–21.
DRIVING INNOVATION IN OUR CITIES AND OUR REGIONS
Labor has a comprehensive plan to drive innovation in cities and regions right across Queensland. This includes:
Supporting great ideas with co-investment in early stage and high potential companies through the $500 million Smart Investment Fund.
Bringing together the superannuation, venture capital and startup sectors in an Innovation Investment Partnership to identify barriers to investment in Australian-based venture capital funds and early-stage enterprises.
Improving access to finance for startups and microbusinesses through a partial guarantee scheme, Startup Finance.
Getting startups to help solve government problems through Challenge Platforms and support startups to compete in government tenders.
Accelerating innovation in our regions through Regional Innovation Hubs.
Reforming the innovation architecture through Innovate Australia.
Improving the flow of capital to startups through Startup Capital.
Backing our best and brightest overseas with Landing Pad hubs for Australian innovators.
Labor´s plan for Queensland schools, universities and tafe
Improving education is the key to boosting opportunity and driving the future economic and social prosperity of our nation.
Australia cannot be an innovation nation without a world class education system. Labor will make the targeted, needs-based investments Queensland needs to give every child the chance to reach their potential and get ahead in the knowledge economy of the future.
KEEPING OUR UNIVERSITIES OPEN TO ALL
Queensland will not have a strong economy if students are forced to pay for $100,000university degrees.
Under the Liberals, many students will be priced out of university, no matter how bright they are.
Labor will deliver a Student Funding Guarantee, removing the need for higher fees.
With Labor, students will be able to study at universities like Griffith, CQU and James Cook because of their good marks and hard work, not their bank balance.
PROTECTING TAFE – STRENGTHENING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Labor will protect TAFE by introducing a TAFE Funding Guarantee to ensure that our vocational education system is properly funded into the future.
Labor will undertake a comprehensive National Vocational Education and Training Sector Review to make sure our system is meeting the needs of students and employers, and weed out dodgy providers and enforce strong standards.
IMPROVING QUEENSLAND SCHOOLS - YOUR CHILD. OUR FUTURE
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future plan will put Australia’s schools back among the very best in the world.
Every student in every school will be supported to achieve their best through investment in: More one-on-one support.
Better remedial literacy and numeracy programs - and more extension options.
Early intervention programs in every school.
Improved Year 12 retention – supported by more vocational pathways.
Better access to allied health support – like speech and occupational therapists.
Labor’s investment is targeted to improve the results of those students who need it most, including students with disability, Indigenous students, students in regional and rural areas, and students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
Labor’s policy is a $36 billion investment in our nation’s schools over the next decade, including $725 million more in targeted, needs-based funding for Queensland schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
Across Queensland, Labor’s investment in local schools means more targeted, needs-based funding: In South East Queensland, Labor will invest $503 million more for schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
In Central Queensland, Labor will invest $99 million more for schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
In North Queensland, Labor will invest $140 million more for schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
In Far North Queensland, Labor will invest $50 million more for schools in 2018 and 2019 alone, compared to the Liberals.
One hundred Indigenous teaching scholarships will be provided by Labor to increase the number of Indigenous teachers and provide role models for students.
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATHEMATICS
Labor is committed to ensuring that all Queensland students have the opportunity to learn coding – an essential skill for the future workforce.
Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing occupations of the future will require skills in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Labor will provide 25,000 teaching scholarships for recent STEM graduates and support 25,000 existing teachers to up-skill across Australia.
This will see around 9,500 new and up-skilled STEM teachers in Queensland schools.
Labor will provide 100,000 STEM Award Degrees – meaning students who graduate from certain STEM courses not be burdened with a HECS debt.
INVESTING IN INDIGENOUS STUDENTS
A Shorten Labor Government will invest an additional $100 million to support Indigenous students and boost the number of Indigenous teachers.
Labor’s Your Child. Our Future will provide an additional $96 million towards improving outcomes for Indigenous students around Australia in 2018 and 2019.
In addition, Labor will provide $4.8 million to fund 100 scholarships per year for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students, and increase the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander teachers.
Investing in the infrastructure Queensland needs.
Labor will build the infrastructure Queensland needs.
Our initiatives will create thousands of local jobs for Queensland, by supporting Gladstone Port, Cairns Airport and Brisbane’s Cross River Rail project.
Labor will undertake proper planning to ensure that scarce taxpayer dollars are spent on the projects that will promote new jobs.
Our infrastructure investments will be properly analysed and assessed by Infrastructure Australia.
A FIRST CLASS STADIUM FOR TOWNSVILLE
Labor will provide $100 million to build a first class Townsville Stadium in partnership with the Queensland Labor Government.
For too long, football fans have been watching rugby league and other sports at sub-standard facilities compared to the football stadiums in southern Queensland and New South Wales. Labor will change this.
Modern community infrastructure is critical to local economies, particularly in regional centres, helping to drive economic growth and local jobs.
Construction of the project is expected to support over 700 jobs in the region and provide a significant boost to the local economy.
BRISBANE’S CROSS RIVER RAIL
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $800 million in the Brisbane Cross River Rail project, easing congestion, improving transport connections and creating local jobs for a growing city.
Queensland’s highest priority infrastructure project, it will cater for future growth, unlock economic opportunities and make Queensland a more internationally competitive state.
The Cross River Rail project includes a 10.2 kilometre link from Dutton Park to Bowen Hills, with 5.9 kilometres of tunnel under the Brisbane River and CBD.
It will connect to northern and southern rail networks, making the commute faster from both directions.
Stations will be developed at five important locations: Boggo Road, Woolloongabba, Albert Street, Roma Street and the Exhibition showgrounds.
As well as increasing the capacity of the entire Brisbane public transport network, and expanding the network to accommodate future growth, the full project will create 1,600 new local jobs, including up to 160 apprenticeships.
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA TOURISM FUND
A Shorten Labor will establish a $1 billion Northern Australia Tourism Infrastructure Fund, to boost partnerships with the tourism sector and to provide incentives to business for investment in new and upgraded tourism infrastructure across Northern Australia, including in Queensland north of the Tropic of Capricorn, and in Gladstone.
Categories of tourism eligible for the funding will include (but not be limited to): Projects targeting the expanding Asian tourism market.
Projects promoting Australia’s natural environment such as the Great Barrier Reef.
Eco-tourism.
Indigenous tourism ventures.
Event-based facilities including stadia and convention centres.
Transport and access upgrades, including for ports and airports that support tourism.
Funding would be available through concessional loans and other forms of project finance, ensuring that projects will need to stack up and potentially attract private financing.
UPGRADING THE GATEWAY-M1 MERGE
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $168 million to upgrade the Gateway-M1 merge, easing congestion and boosting productivity in one of the fast-growing regions of Queensland.
With congestion in this busy area frequently causing long queues and delays for motorists, Labor will add additional southbound lanes on the M1 between Eight Mile Plains and Springwood to improve the merge with the Gateway Motorway.
The full project will create almost 550 new local jobs.
CENTRAL QUEENSLAND ROADS PACKAGE
Despite the Abbott-Turnbull Government talking big about infrastructure in the north, they have failed to deliver a single new major infrastructure project for Northern Australia over the last three years.
Queensland is a large state which relies heavily on roads for the movement of people and freight.
North and Central Queenslanders rely upon roads to connect their communities and provide access to services.
A Shorten Labor Government will commit $418 million to improve road safety, create more than 1,000 jobs, boost productivity and make life easier for North and Central Queenslanders.
Gladstone Port Access Road – $80 million
This project will extend the existing Port Access road from Glenlyon Road to Blain Drive, including a new bridge to be constructed over Glenlyon Road.
Gladstone families will benefit from the safer roads with heavy truck traffic removed from Glenyon Road to Blain Drive and Gladstone’s ring roads.
Walkerston Bypass – $150 million
The realignment of the Peak Downs Highway to bypass Walkerston will increase safety on the existing route through the main street of Walkerston by minimising heavy vehicle traffic and removing the interaction between heavy vehicle traffic and local traffic.
The new route will offer a safer and more efficient link for the mining industry in the northern Bowen Basin to Mackay and, in particular, the industrial area of Paget.
Additionally, Labor will deliver the following road upgrades in central and northern Queensland: Rockhampton to Yeppoon road ($30 million).
Hann Highway ($43 million).n Capricorn Highway overtaking lanes ($19 million).
Capricorn Highway between Rockhampton and Gracemere ($75 million).
Rockhampton (Bajool to Port Alma Road) port access road ($15 million).
Cairns Airport access upgrade ($6 million).
These projects will create 1,100 new local jobs.
UPGRADING THE IPSWICH MOTORWAY
Labor will commit $200 million to the first stage of upgrading the Ipswich Motorway between Rocklea and Darra, tackling traffic congestion on Brisbane’s southside.
The upgrade will boost the capacity of the Ipswich Motorway from four lanes to six between Granard and Oxley roads, reducing travelling times for 85,000 motorists who use it each day, including 12,000 trucks hauling freight.
The full project will create over 1,000 local jobs.
INVESTIGATING TOWNSVILLE WATER OPTIONS
A Shorten Labor Government will contribute $4 million to a major Water Infrastructure Feasibility Study for Townsville.
The study will consider upgrades to existing water infrastructure, including: Raising the wall of the existing Burdekin Dam.
Duplicating the existing pipeline between Burdekin and Ross River dams.
A water treatment plant to be used with the existing pipeline.
Other affordable water efficiency measures.
Labor will stop the privatization of medicare
First the Liberals tried to introduce a GP Tax, then the Liberals introduced a GP Tax by stealth by freezing the indexation of the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The Liberals are doing all they can to destroy Medicare. We will prevent the Liberals from privatising Medicare
In contrast, Labor has a positive plan to protect Medicare and ensure our world class universal health care system continues to deliver the best health outcomes for every Australian into the future.
PROTECTING MEDICARE
Labor built Medicare and we will always fight to protect it.
Labor will reverse the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s freeze on the indexation of the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
This means that under Labor an average family in Queensland with two children will be more than $400 better off.
SCRAPPING THE MEDICINE PRICE HIKE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ medicine price hike and ensure medicine remains affordable for middle and working class Queensland families.
Under the Liberals, medicine will go up by as much as $5 per script. Under Labor, medicines will be more affordable.
INVESTING IN HOSPITALS
Labor will increase funding for Queensland hospitals over the next four years.
This will reduce waiting times for elective surgery and in emergency departments.
Under Labor, hospitals in Queensland will receive $400 million more than they would under the Liberals.
UPGRADING CAIRNS HOSPITAL
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $11.6 million to upgrade Cairns Hospital to address bed shortages at this regionally vital hospital.
This commitment will see 2,100 square metres of currently unused hospital space fitted out to accommodate the growing number of patients presenting at the Cairns Hospital emergency department.
REFURBISHMENT OF LOGAN HOSPITAL
The birth rate per capita in the Logan area outstrips that of the state by almost 20 per cent, with more than 3,500 births at the hospital each year.
A Shorten Labor Government will fund a $10 million refurbishment of Logan Hospital’s maternity and special care services facilities.
This refurbishment will give the hospital the option of co-locating antenatal services, providing a complete maternity service environment and genuine continuity of patient care.
PET SCANNER FOR ROCKHAMPTON HOSPITAL
A Shorten Labor Government will purchase a new PET scanner at Rockhampton – reducing the need to travel to Brisbane for scans and treating up to 1,000 patients in Central Queensland.
REVERSING CUTS TO PATHOLOGY AND IMAGING SERVICES
A Shorten Labor Government will reverse Malcolm Turnbull’s cuts to bulk billing for pathology and diagnostic imaging.
Labor’s measures give pathologists and radiologists an incentive to bulk bill.
Without it, bulk billing will fall, co-payments will rise, and patients will be forced to pay more for tests and scans – or to skip them altogether.
PREVENTATIVE HEALTH PACKAGE
Chronic diseases are the leading cause of illness, disability and death in Australia.
Many of these diseases are due to preventable risk factors such as physical inactivity, poor nutrition, smoking and harmful use of alcohol.
Labor has developed a five-point plan to combat chronic disease:
Investing in 50 Healthy Communities nationwide, to help communities at the greatest risk of chronic disease to stay well.
Tackling obesity through Australia’s first National Physical Activity Strategy and a National Nutrition Framework.
Expanding the successful Better Health Channel into a nationwide platform for health information.
Continuing the push to reduce smoking rates, particularly in at-risk communities.
Addressing harmful use of alcohol through a National Alcohol Strategy.
A NATIONAL APPROACH TO SUICIDE PREVENTION
A Shorten Labor Government will set a target to reduce deaths by suicide by 50 per cent over the next 10 years.
Our National Suicide Strategy will provide a strong national commitment to reduce the suicide toll, and coordinate a focused effort across Australia.
Labor will commission Australia’s first national data set of suicide deaths and invest $72 million over three years for 12 regional suicide pilot projects.
CLOSING THE GAP IN INDIGENOUS HEALTH
A Shorten Labor Government will continue the work of the previous Labor Government and work to close the gap on Indigenous health outcomes.
Labor will provide $5.5 million a year to roll out the Deadly Choices initiative across the country.
Labor will convene a National Taskforce on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Kidney Disease as a priority to look for holistic solutions to the current crisis.
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $9.5 million to close the gap in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander vision loss.
INNOVATION IN HEALTH CARE
Because of Labor, Australia has one of the best health care systems in the world.
But Australia’s health care system continues to face significant challenges.
An ageing population, growing health inequality among many groups, as well as locations of disadvantage, all mean that Australia requires new and innovative approaches to care.
If elected, a Shorten Labor Government will provide an additional $100 million over two years to develop and roll out new models of primary care around Australia.
LIFE SAVING MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CARE
Labor will invest in life saving research and care in Queensland. Our nationwide commitments include: $10.6 million to increase the number of prostate cancer nurses.
$8 million for ovarian cancer research.
$7 million to assist women with breast cancer. in rural areas and with secondary breast cancer.
$1.1 million to assist people managing allergic diseases.
$4 million to improve care and support for people suffering from Motor Neurone Disease.
$84 million to improve access to lifesaving technologies for Australians with type 1 diabetes.
YOUTH DRUG AND ALCOHOL DETOX FACILITY
Labor will invest $5 million in drug and alcohol rehabilitation treatment facilities in Townsville in partnership with the Salvation Army.
It means people who are struggling with ice addiction, families who are trying to get treatment for their children, trying to turn their lives around, will have access to local treatment.
Additionally, a Shorten Labor Government will develop a new National Drug Strategy, delivering smart, cost-effective policies that help vulnerable communities in the grip of illicit drug abuse.
Labor will ensure that people who want to turn their life around don’t have to wait six months or more for a treatment service.
Strong families and communities
Labor will repair the federal Budget without smashing family budgets.
FAMILY TAX BENEFITS
Labor will oppose the Liberal Government’s harsh cuts to Family Tax Benefits (FTB).
Under Labor, families earning less than $100,000 will maintain their FTB at current rates.
Under Labor, a couple with a single income of $85,000 and two children in primary school will be around $1,300 better off each year.
A sole parent with income of $65,000 and two children in high school will be around $3,000 better off each year under Labor.
EARLY EDUCATION AND CARE
Every one of the 134,000 families in Queensland that rely on the Child Care Benefit will be better off under Labor.
From 1 January 2017 Labor will increase the Child Care Benefit by 15 per cent.
This is an increase of up to $31 per child per week, or up to $1,627 per child per year.
In South East Queensland, 116,290 families receiving the Child Care Benefit will be better off.
In Central Queensland, 8,370 families receiving the Child Care Benefit will be better off.
In North Queensland, 11,370 families receiving the Child Care Benefit will be better off.
In Far North Queensland, 5,630 families receiving the Child Care Benefit will be better off.
Labor’s plan to increase the Child Care Rebate cap from $7,500 to $10,000 from 1 January 2017 will mean that many of the 172,000 families in Queensland that rely on the Child Care Rebate will be up to $2,500 better off per child per year: In South East Queensland, many of the 149,070 families receiving the Child Care Rebate will be better off.
In Central Queensland, many of the 11,200 families receiving the Child Care Rebate will be better off.
In North Queensland, many of the 15,360 families receiving the Child Care Rebate will be better off.
In Far North Queensland, many of the 6,680 families receiving the Child Care Rebate will be better off.
In addition, Labor will invest $25 million to upgrade facilities and improve the quality of programs in Budget Base Funded early education and care services, which serve many remote communities.
Many of these services face an uncertain future under the Liberals’ proposed child care changes.
Labor will provide $57 million to the 38 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children and Family Centres to increase places and provide better education, health and family support for local families.
The Liberals cut funding for these vital services.
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
Labor will scrap the Liberals’ plan to cut paid parental leave to around 80,000 new mums each year.
Under Labor, parents will be as much as $11,800 better off when they have a baby.
LOCAL COMMUNITY PROJECTS
A Shorten Labor Government will invest in a range of community projects to improve quality of life for the people right across Queensland.
These include:  $6.7 million in funding for the new Port Douglas reservoir, ensuring water security.
$1.2 million to deliver much-needed upgrades to sporting facilities on Brisbane’s south side, boosting local teams and supporting women in football.
$1.3 million to back Brisbane community and arts organisations so they can continue to support local communities.
$3.1 million to contribute to funding Beef Australia Week 2018 and establish the Federal Government as a principal partner.
$560,000 to support football players and their fans in northern Brisbane by upgrading the Ridge Hills United Football Club in Bald Hills
$1 million to revitalise the Sunnybank Pedestrian  Bridge, used by more than 5,000 people per day
$1 million to redevelop the Redcliffe Police-Citizens Youth Club, better enabling support of disadvantaged youth.
$5 million to develop the Philip Street Communities Precinct in Gladstone, matching local council funding.
$7.5 million to contain and reduce the yellow crazy ant population in the Wet Tropics of Queensland.
Under the Liberals, Queensland has been through three years of harsh cuts, chaos and broken promises.
Cuts to schools and universities, cuts to Medicare, cuts to Family Tax Benefits and cuts to pensions.
This is the legacy of the Abbott-Turnbull Government.
Queensland cannot afford another three years of cuts hurting families and the local economy.
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT
Under the Liberals the youth unemployment rate in Queensland has remained stagnant at 13 per cent, more than double the national unemployment rate.
The number of young people in job training across the State has plummeted.
There are now nearly 23,800 fewer apprentices in Queensland than there were in 2013.
Labor is committed to ensuring one in ten jobs on our priority projects will be filled by new apprentices, so young people from all across Queensland can learn the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
CUTS TO SCHOOLS
The Liberals have cut more than $6 billion from Queensland schools.
This means larger classes, less personal attention and fewer resources for students.
It means Indigenous students; students with disability or additional learning needs; and students from low socio-economic backgrounds will miss out on the support they need to achieve their best.
$4.5 billion has been cut from schools in South East Queensland.
$630 million has been cut from schools in Central Queensland.
$675 million has been cut from schools in North Queensland.
$256 million has been cut from schools in Far North Queensland.
CUTS TO HOSPITALS
The Liberals have cut billions from Queensland health facilities.
This will put further pressure on already stretched public hospitals and push up waiting times for elective surgery and emergency department care.
CUTS TO UNIVERSITIES
Over the next five years the Liberals will rip more than $1.1 billion from Queensland universities.
If the Liberals get their way, university students from Queensland would be facing fees of up to $100,000 for degrees.
Universities across Queensland face massive cuts under the Liberals: Griffith University will lose $228 million over the next five years.
Central Queensland University will lose $87 million over the next five years.
The University of Southern Queensland will lose $115 million over the next five years.
James Cook University will lose $135 million over the next five years.
The University of Queensland will lose $290 million over the next five years.
Queensland University of Technology will lose $250 million over the next five years.
The University of the Sunshine Coast will lose $71 million over the next five years.
CUTS TO VULNERABLE AUSTRALIANS
In their 2014 Budget, the Liberals tried to leave young jobseekers with nothing to live on for six months.
In 2015 they tried to leave them with nothing for a month.
The Liberals tried to cut $2,500 from jobseekers under 25 by changing the eligibility age for Newstart and Youth Allowance.
CUTS TO PENSIONS
In 2014, the Liberals tried to cut the indexation arrangement for every one of Queensland’s 812,000 pensioners.
If the Liberals are re-elected, Queensland pensioners will lose up to $1,600 from the abolition of the Pensioner Education Supplement and $208 from the abolition of the Education Entry Payment.
In South East Queensland, this cut will affect 619,660 pensioners.
In Central Queensland, this cut will affect 82,786 pensioners.
In North Queensland, this cut will affect 80,624 pensioners.
In Far North Queensland, this cut will affect 28,220 pensioners.
Under the Liberals, age pensioners who were born overseas and want to spend more time overseas when they retire will have their pension reduced after six weeks.
CUTS TO FAMILIES
More than 330,000 families in Queensland will lose their full Family Tax Benefit Part A Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected.
That’s a cut of $726 per child, per year.
More than 273,000 single parents and single income families in Queensland will lose their Family Tax Benefit Part B Supplement if the Liberals are re-elected – a cut of $354 per family per year.
CUTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES
The Liberals cut $200 million from assistance grants to Queensland councils in the 2014 Budget.
These cuts are ongoing, and very significantly impact on the ability of councils in Queensland to deliver basic community services like child care and libraries.
It has led to cuts in road maintenance, and has cost local jobs.
A UNITED LABOR TEAMWILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS.
WE ARE UNITED.
WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
POSITIVE POLICY
Labor's Positive Policies For Agriculture And Regional Australia
A Shorten Labor Government will provide the policy guidance Australia’s agriculture sector needs to meet its full potential, rise to its challenges and create more prosperity and jobs in our regions.
Australia prospers when our regions prosper.
From cattle farms and wineries to wool, wheat and minerals, regional Australia generates a significant part of Australia’s wealth.
In return, regional communities rightly expect the same high quality services and facilities that people in our major cities enjoy.
Labor will put productivity and sustainable profitability front-and-centre in our determination to see regional Australia thrive and our agricultural industries grow into the future.
Labor understands and shares the aspirations of Australia’s agriculture sector: to boost jobs, strengthen regional communities and move Australia up the value curve for long-term growth.
Our plan for Australian agriculture will allow us to work together with the sector and regional Australians to meet those aspirations in the years to come.
GROWING JOBS, BUILDING SUSTAINABLE PROFITABILTY LABOR’S POSITIVE PLAN FOR AGRICULTURE AND REGIONAL AUSTRALIA
A MESSAGE FROM BILL SHORTENAbout 7.2 million people live in rural and regional Australia – and every one of them is fiercely proud of the communities they call home. Labor understands that life in regional and remote Australia is not always easy, but it comes with many rewards.Australia prospers when our regions prosper. From cattle farms and wineries to wool, wheat and minerals, regional Australia generates a significant part of Australia’s wealth.In return, regional communities rightly expect the same high quality services and facilities that people in our major cities enjoy.Labor’s positive plans to invest in every Australian school by fully delivering the Gonski education reforms, protect Medicare to keep health care affordable and accessible, and grow jobs through more infrastructure and apprenticeships will all help to ensure this is the case.A major challenge for the years ahead is to grow local jobs and new economic activity in our regions so that young people don’t have to leave home to get ahead, and communities can continue to thrive.As we transition out of the mining investment boom and the rising consumer class of Asia creates new demand for our food and fibre products, Labor believes the agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors will play a major role in driving the growth and job creation we need. Australia’s strongest opportunities lie in moving up the value chain with a focus on high quality, high value products, not chasing a diminishing margin in an increasingly crowded market for bulk commodities.We will strengthen these sectors through initiatives like our Food, Fibre and Advanced Materials Modernisation Grants, the creation of a National Recreational Fishing Council and the establishment of an Australian Institute for Biosecurity to safeguard Australia’s valuable international reputation as a provider of clean, green and safe food. We will also boost trade, exports and investment so that regional communities can grow in prosperity along with the rest of our country.Labor puts people first – no matter where they live in Australia. My team and I are committed to working every day to ensure people in rural and regional Australia get the opportunity to build a decent life.I invite you to read more about Labor’s positive policies at: www.100positivepolicies.org.au.Bill Shorten
STRONG WORKFORCES STRONG COMMUNITIES
People are the backbone of Australia’s regional economies.
Without new generations of Australians choosing life on the land, our regional cities and towns will slowly wither away.
Labor wants to create more opportunities for industry-relevant education and training close to home so that young people, women and Indigenous Australians can discover the challenges and rewards of a life in agriculture.
PROTECTING REGIONAL UNIVERSITIES AND TAFES
The number of people studying agricultural science disciplines is too low.
According to the University of Queensland, there is strong demand for graduates in agribusiness, agricultural science and food science.
But figures released by the Australian Council of Deans of Agriculture reveal a widening gap between demand and supply of good quality graduates.
National job advertisements for graduates in agriculture number between 4,000 and 4,500, yet only about 800 graduates complete agricultural studies across the country each year.
Those most likely to choose an agriculture-related course at university are those who have grown up in regional Australia.
That’s why Labor is fighting so hard to protect our regional universities and prevent regional students from paying $100,000 for their degrees.
A Shorten Labor Government will introduce a Student Funding Guarantee to provide certainty to universities and remove the need for higher fees.
Regional universities would be hit particularly hard under the Liberals’ plan to deregulate fees because many do not have the same scale of enrolments or capacity to cross-subsidise teaching and research through other channels as city universities do.
Successful farm businesses don’t just require workers with university degrees.
Building a strong agricultural workforce will also require quality vocational education and training (VET) through strong local TAFEs and more apprentices skilled in practical trades.
The Liberals have cut $2.5 billion from the skills portfolio, including $1 billion from apprentice and trainee programs such as Tools for Your Trade and access and mentoring programs.
These cuts have hit apprentices and trainees hard and resulted in the loss of over 120,000 apprentices since September 2013.
Labor will not make the same mistake because we know regional communities, and those right across Australia, cannot afford to see our skills base decline.
That is why Labor will invest in boosting apprenticeships, including by ensuring apprentices are employed on federally-funded infrastructure projects and creating 15,000 new apprentice track training places.
We will also reintroduce Tools for Your Trade – the successful apprentice support program axed by Tony Abbott, because we want to see more young people starting and completing apprenticeships – particularly in regional Australia.
The need for strong regional skills and training is also why Labor has announced a plan to back TAFE into the future by developing a National Priority Plan which will define its unique role and place it squarely as the public provider within the VET sector.
TAFE offers access to training in many places across regional Australia where private providers do not reach, and we must ensure that continues to be the case into the future to build our skilled agricultural workforce.
GROWING THE ROLE OF WOMEN AND INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS IN AGRICULTURE
Women are increasingly playing leading roles in farm businesses across Australia.
They are moving well beyond traditional roles and into planning, planting, cultivating, cropping, testing, analysing and looking after animal welfare.
Indigenous Australians are also combining traditional land management practices with newer agricultural techniques to get the most out of our land while protecting the natural environment.
As farm businesses become more complex and we seek to grow both productivity and output, the role of women and Indigenous Australians will become increasingly important.
Their greater participation will also help to balance out the ageing of our agriculture workforce.
Labor is determined to further promote and support women in agriculture, and will lead by example across the government sector.
We have identified a clear target of having 50 per cent of positions on government boards filled by women within the first term of a Shorten Labor Government.
This would apply to our regional research and development corporations as well as bodies like the Murray-Darling Basin Authority and the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority.
Increasing the visibility of women in these senior roles will provide pathways and role models for more Australian women to pursue careers in agriculture.
A Shorten Labor Government will also provide just over $200 million over five years to double the number of Indigenous rangers under the Working for Country program, from 775 full-time equivalent rangers in 2016-17 to 1,550 by 2020-21.
This will ensure Indigenous rangers are able to continue and expand their work in the management of fire regimes, biodiversity, feral animals, weeds, land disturbance, cultural sites, heritage values, pollution and climate change impacts.
It will also mean rangers are able to grow their role as role models in local communities, and further leverage the close relationship between Indigenous Australians and the environment to continue building our future agricultural workforce.
STRENGTHENING MENTAL HEALTH IN OUR REGIONS
Mental health should be a priority for any government that puts the wellbeing of Australians first.
It’s also a productivity issue, with the mental health of our regional workforce being crucial to the success and growth of the sector.
In regional Australia, suicide rates amongst men are double those in urban areas.
Farmers are 2.2 times more likely to die by suicide than the broader community.
What’s more, psychiatrists in the cities outnumber those in regional areas three to one.
Labor is committed to reducing suicides in Australia by 50 per cent over the next ten years.
A Shorten Labor Government will invest $72 million to establish 12 suicide prevention initiatives – six urban, four regional and two remote – for place-based initiatives that are tailored to local community need.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples suffer mental illness at three times the rate of other Australians.
Labor will also develop an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Mental Health Plan to improve mental health and prevent suicides of Indigenous Australians.
Labor’s positive policies will help build a strong regional workforce and in turn, set regional communities up to thrive for generations to come.
BOOSTING LOCAL JOBS THROUGH  TRADE, EXPORTS  AND INVESTMENT
Since the 1980s, billions of people around the world have been lifted out of poverty by economic growth and development.
Within the Asia Pacific region, this trend is transforming poor neighbours into potential customers at a very rapid rate.
An estimated 90 million people will join Indonesia’s middle class by 2030; on current trends 70 per cent of China’s population will also have risen to comfortable prosperity by that time.
India’s middle class is projected to grow from less than 50 million people today to over 475 million within the next 15 years.
By 2030, two in three of the world’s middle class people will live in Asia.
These new consumers like to spend and demand for a wide range of goods and services has skyrocketed as a result.
In 2014 private consumption in China, India and Indonesia was already worth a combined US$5.7 trillion – six times the value of Australian domestic consumption.
Our local wineries, food producers and education providers have been early beneficiaries of this spending boom.
But there are opportunities here for a much wider range of Australian businesses to create new jobs and find new markets.
We will need the right policy settings to fully realise the export potential of our services industries, manufacturers, food and fibre production and agriculture.
That is what a Shorten Labor Government will deliver.
MAKING TRADE WORK FOR BUSINESS
At present, less than 5 per cent of all Australian businesses are exporting overseas, making our economy far less trade-intensive than many comparable countries.
Many businesses are not even considering exporting despite the opportunities in our region – PwC’s Passing Us By report shows two-thirds of Australian businesses have no intention of exporting into Asian markets in the near future.
Opening up access to new markets through trade agreements is a critical first step in boosting exports.
That’s why a Shorten Labor Government will continue to seek high quality international trade agreements to improve market access for Australian exporters.
But governments need to do more than tackle the barriers imposed at the borders.
It is also important to tackle the barriers would-be exporters face at home – such as lack of information and market research, shortages of skills and expertise, market failures in access to finance, a lack of contacts in export markets and the impact of freight costs and red tape in moving goods across borders.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will: Tackle barriers to Australian exports
We will adopt a strategic approach to improving market access for exporters by carrying out stock takes of trade barriers faced by Australian exporters, both at home and abroad, and produce a regular Trade Barriers Analysis.
Reduce red tape for exporters
We will tackle red tape barriers by working to ensure trade agreements contain easily understood and consistent rules of origin for determining whether Australian goods qualify for preferential access to key export markets.
Several surveys and reports show that many Australian businesses are not utilising market access opportunities available to them.
The complexity and costs of complying with rules of origin are one of the discouraging factors.
While there are no quick fixes, a Labor Government will work with Australia’s trading partners to streamline and harmonise existing rules of origin across trade agreements.
Facilitate trade in our region
Labor will work with key Asian trading partners to help them implement trade facilitation reforms which will encourage more two-way trade by reducing costs and improving efficiency.
The World Trade Organisation’s Trade Facilitation Agreement negotiated in 2013 has the potential to significantly reduce trade costs.
But many developing countries need technical assistance and capacity building support to implement these reforms.
A Shorten Labor Government will better target Australia’s “aid for trade” funding towards helping developing economies to implement these reforms.
IMPROVING MARKETING AND BRANDING
Australia is known for the quality and safety of our food products.
Our freedom from many pests and diseases, the environmental stewardship of our farmers and land managers and our world-class food safety management system all contribute to this strong global reputation.
Emphasising the quality of Australian food and finding ways to more clearly identify our clean, green and environmentally friendly credentials will allow exporters to benefit from our valuable national brand.
Labor will work with industry to deliver strong international branding to build upon Australia’s reputation as a leader in the production of premium food and to increase export opportunities.
STRIKING THE RIGHT BALANCE ON INVESTMENT
To take full advantage of the Asian “dining boom” and other global export opportunities, it has been estimated Australia will need $600 billion of capital investment in the years to 2050.
That means our agriculture sector will need to secure investment of $26 billion a year on top of the $16 billion currently invested.
This is a big gap to close, and to achieve it we will need to look to emerging and non-traditional sources of foreign investment, particularly within our region.
The foreign investment screening changes introduced by the Abbott-Turnbull Government run directly counter to the goal of attracting more investment from new sources.
The Government has imposed new foreign investment screening thresholds of $55 million for investment in agribusiness and $15 million (cumulative) for investment in agricultural land.
These changes have been the subject of widespread criticism from business, including the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Food and Grocery Council.
These business groups have rightly pointed out that this is no way to encourage investment.
In addition to driving away investment when we need it, these changes will undermine, rather than build, the public support that is essential to making foreign investment work.
That is why Labor will restore consistency in screening thresholds by bringing all agricultural land application thresholds into line with those in our trade agreements with Thailand and Singapore.
This $50 million threshold strikes the right balance between maintaining the strength of the screening system and keeping red tape in check.
We will also review the current regime’s discriminatory treatment of investments in non-sensitive sectors by investors from Singapore, Thailand and non-FTA trading partners and the treatment of agricultural land.
Furthermore, a Shorten Labor Government will make the foreign land investment register public so that every Australian can see who is buying agricultural land, and where.
Labor started work on this register when last in office, but this has not been delivered because the Abbott-Turnbull Government broke an election promise to match this by creating a transparent register of its own.
Trade, exports and foreign investment represent huge opportunities to grow jobs and make Australia’s regions more prosperous.
Labor will put the right rules and structures in place to ensure regional Australians benefit, while protecting our environment and resources in the process.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION FOR BET TER PRODUCTIVITY
Australia’s agriculture sector has a world-class research and development system.
The current co-funding architecture is a proud Labor legacy.
Research, development, extension, adoption and innovation will be critical to our success in lifting productivity, farming smarter and more sustainably, and securing greater value and return for our limited natural resources.
Further, our growers and producers contribute to our national research and development effort through compulsory levies, so they deserve to know they are receiving value for money.
A Labor Government will review the work and funding arrangements of our agriculture based research and development institutions to ensure they are operating efficiently, focusing on productivity and delivering value for money.
Our performance in research and development has been strong but less impressive in extension and innovation.
In particular, there is scope for a greater allocation of resources to cross-sectoral work where more than one commodity group is the beneficiary.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the area of biosecurity.
We can’t lift productivity across the agricultural sector if we are not seriously tackling some of the things that hold it back: weeds; invasive species; pest animals and disease.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE FOR BIOSECURITY
Labor will establish an Australian Institute for Biosecurity to manage the challenges of pest animals, weeds and plant disease incursions on the land and in our waterways and oceans.
This initiative will allow the Government, as a major investor in RD&E, to identify and address research gaps relating to long-term sustainability and cross-sectoral issues.
The Institute’s primary role will be to maintain and build on the existing network of research and industry partners across plant, animal, aquaculture and marine biosecurity.
It will support sustainable RD&E projects and identify pathways to enduring long-term strategic management beyond the current 5 to 10-year approach.
The Institute will also deal with the challenges of environmental biosecurity while protecting the livelihood of our farmers and graziers, and those who make their living from the aquaculture and marine industries.
The Institute for Biosecurity will develop a strategic work plan to ensure the long-term health of Australia’s agricultural sector, animal industries and natural environment.
MANAGING YELLOW CRAZY ANTS
Yellow Crazy Ants pose a significant risk to agricultural industries such as the sugar cane industry, and industries such as tourism in Queensland’s Wet Tropics.
They are a serious environmental and agricultural pest, recognised among the world’s 100 most invasive species.
A Shorten Labor Government will inject $7.5 million to contain and reduce the Yellow Crazy Ant population in the Wet Tropics of Queensland.
In 2013, Labor provided $2 million over five years to the Wet Tropics Management Authority through the Caring for Our Country Program to eradicate a large infestation of Yellow Crazy Ants of up to 400ha.
This treatment has successfully reduced ant numbers and has minimised further spread, but more needs to be done.
Labor’s additional $7.5 million commitment will help control the spread of these pests to protect the industries currently threatened by them.
AUSTRALIAN TROPICAL MARINE AND AQUACULTURE CENTRE
Labor will also boost local jobs and science in our regional cities by contributing to the establishment of a new industry-facing aquaculture research facility in central Townsville.
We will contribute $31.7 million to drive deeper collaboration between the Australian Institute of Marine Science and James Cook University, with these funds to go towards the establishment of JCU’s $100 million Australian Tropical Marine and Aquaculture Centre.
Labor will make this investment in the centre to support its development as a new industry-oriented research and commercialisation facility.
It will leverage Townsville’s significant scientific expertise in marine science and aquaculture, helping to grow the industry and deliver new discoveries in sustainable food production and marine resource management.
The aquaculture industry represents a transformative opportunity for Townsville with great economic potential.
Growing this industry will not only create jobs, but also support the  Asia Pacific region and the potential flow-on effects to educational and science tourism.
AUSTRALIAN PESTICIDES AND VETERINARY MEDICINES AUTHORITY
The Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority plays a crucial role in registering and regulating the products farmers rely on to improve productivity and keep their herds healthy.
Barnaby Joyce plans to disrupt the authority’s work by relocating it from its traditional home in Canberra to Armidale, in his own electorate.
Not only is this an incredible waste of taxpayer money, but it will significantly diminish the authority’s operational capacity.
Its 200-strong workforce is made up of highly qualified professionals and scientists, who live in Canberra, work in Canberra and send their children to Canberra schools.
It is well known that the authority will lose the majority of its professional staff if this forced relocation takes place.
This will be a disaster for our farmers who will lose access to critically important crop protection chemicals and animal medicines.
That is why the National Farmers Federation, Animal Medicines Australia, CropLife Australia and the Veterinary Manufacturers and Distributors Association have all opposed the authority’s move.
Labor will not proceed with Barnaby Joyce’s half-baked plan to move the authority for no good reason.
We will ensure it continues its good work in Canberra with the highly skilled workforce needed to support proper farm science.
FOOD AND FIBRE INNOVATION
Australia’s food and fibre producers are key drivers of wealth in Australia’s regions.
But these sectors are now at a crossroads.
For much of Australia’s history they have been best known as producers of largely homogenous but good quality commodities.
This has left them exposed as price-takers in increasingly competitive global commodity markets.
Productivity is also in decline as changing weather patterns threaten the viability of previously productive land; our farm workforce ages; and road, rail and port infrastructure fails to keep pace with growing demand.
One of Australia’s key competitive advantages is our reputation as a supplier of clean, green, high quality and safe food.
So the most successful strategy for Australia’s food production sector will be the pursuit of new markets for high quality, high value and niche products through innovation.
Some of our producers have already started down this path: developing wheat that is specifically suited to Japan’s udon noodle market; new fruit varieties for Asian tastes; value-added dairy products and marbled wagyu in which the fat is relatively healthy.
There is an opportunity for our fibre producers to do likewise by developing innovative, high quality materials for specialist applications like defence and industry.
That is why Labor will support more producers and manufacturers to deliver product innovation through our Food, Fibre and Advanced Materials Modernisation Grants program.
This competitive merit-based grants program will match investments by producers and manufacturers in projects to improve the efficiency of their operations and increase investment in innovation and new technologies, including energy efficient capital equipment and low emissions technologies.
These grants are a direct response to industry concerns about the difficulty in accessing finance to invest in capital improvements to production and manufacturing facilities that lower costs and improve the competitiveness of Australian industries.
Total funding of $54.2 million over four years will be available to deliver the grants.
The program will offer a range of flexible grants of up to $5 million on a matched funding basis.
Along with this targeted measure, Labor will continue to build industry and research linkages and ensure Australia’s world-class scientific research infrastructure is deployed to best effect to grow local jobs and investment in these critical industries, utilising the formidable strengths of the CSIRO, our universities and the Cooperative Research Centres program.
Key to protecting Australia’s reputation as a provider of clean, green and safe food is the adequate funding and management of the departments and agencies charged with maintaining the integrity and success of our biosecurity system.
When last in government, Labor initiated the Beale Review of Australia’s quarantine and biosecurity arrangements.
The review led to the modernising of the Quarantine Act in line with its recommendations.
But we are concerned that recent budget cuts are undermining the capacity to keep our biosecurity arrangements strong.
A Shorten Labor Government will closely examine the work and capacity of the Department of Agriculture and associated agencies to ensure they are capable of protecting Australia’s valuable biosecurity and clean, green reputation.
Also crucial to the protection of our reputation is the capacity to quickly respond to events which threaten our reputation and brand.
This is why Australia needs a modern and comprehensive traceability system which allows the seller to trace products back to their source and along every point on the value chain.
Technology is making the prospects of a comprehensive electronic satellite-based system more feasible and a Shorten Labor Government will work with the private sector to build a stronger traceability capacity.
REGIONAL INNOVATION HUBS
Australia’s agricultural sector will reap serious benefits from integrating science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM)-led innovations into on-farm production.
From farmers increasing their output through real-time monitoring of water and fertilizer use to fibre producers developing new specialty products, innovation will improve output and create more jobs in agribusiness just as much as in every other sector of the economy.
That is why Labor will establish up to 20 new Regional Innovation Hubs across Australia.
The locations will be chosen based on applications from consortia that must include: a regional university or TAFE; one or more local governments; and a local business organisation – such as a Chamber of Commerce – or a group of local businesses.
Each hub will receive funding of up to $500,000 per year for three years, which must be matched at least dollar-for-dollar with funding from the consortium or other sources.
This will be used to provide seed funding to projects and companies that are commercialising research or developing new products that respond to opportunities in Australia’s agricultural sector.
Innovation in food and fibre production and right across the agricultural sector will see Australia build on our strengths for improved productivity and profitability.
Labor’s new investments in research and regional producers will support this important work so that regional communities can reap the benefits.
IMPROVING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
The productive capacity of Australian agriculture will be driven by both human and physical capital.
That is why infrastructure is critical to our future prosperity.
Boosting investment in infrastructure expands our economic opportunities.
In the same way a company invests in its capital stock to underpin future growth, Australia needs to invest in the stock of physical capital to underpin future prosperity, boost productivity and improve our competitiveness.
A Shorten Labor Government will ensure we do.
BETTER ROAD AND RAIL
Labor has a strong record of ensuring that our agricultural industry is well served by efficient road and rail that facilitates the swift passage of goods to local and export markets.
In government, we produced the nation’s first National Land Freight Strategy and National Ports Strategy, setting up the apparatus for better planning and co-ordination of delivery of infrastructure to ensure individual projects are properly integrated into a national network.
Between 2007 and 2013 the former Labor Government doubled federal road funding and built critical regional roads including major upgrades of the Hume, Pacific, Bruce and Great Western Highways.
On rail, we invested $3 billion upgrading 4000 kilometres of the National Freight Network through the Australian Rail Track Corporation.
This cut the average freight trip from Brisbane to Melbourne by seven hours and shrunk the journey from the nation’s east to west coasts by nine hours.
Importantly, Labor also committed $900 million to the proposed Inland Rail link between Brisbane and Melbourne, including $600 million worth of investment upgrading parts of the existing network that will form part of the project and $300 million to continue work.
A Shorten Labor Government will continue to invest in critical economic infrastructure across our regions, including the following projects: Victorian Regional Transport package – VIC – $350 million.
Midland Highway – TAS – $100 million.
Gladstone Port Access Road – QLD – $80 million.
Capricorn Highway – QLD – $75 million.
Northern Territory Infrastructure Package – NT – $58 million.
Rockhampton-Yeppoon Road – QLD – $30 million.
A FIRST-CLASS NATIONAL BROADBAND NETWORK
Labor’s National Broadband Network was designed to bridge the great divide between our cities and regions.
Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate NBN is short-changing regional Australians, including those on the land.
Labor will pick up the pieces and work towards providing the broadband services regional Australia deserves because we understand the most important piece of infrastructure for our 21st century economy is a first-rate, fibre NBN.
The original Labor NBN would have delivered optic fibre to 93 per cent of homes and businesses, including 70 per cent of regional cities and towns.
The original NBN also delivered universal wholesale pricing, meaning that people in the bush paid the same wholesale price for broadband as people in our big cities.
In 2013, Malcolm Turnbull scrapped Labor’s world class fibre-to-the-premises NBN.
Instead the Liberals are building a slower, second-rate copper NBN that will leave Australia behind and hamstring regional businesses into the future.
Malcolm Turnbull also moved to axe universal wholesale pricing, meaning people in the bush will pay more for broadband than people in our cities.
Under the Liberals, homes and businesses on the NBN satellites have to pay much more than people in our cities just to get the average household download allowance.
A Shorten Labor Government will phase out Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper NBN and scale up the rollout of fibre-to-the-premises.
This will deliver fibre-to-the-premises to up to two million homes and businesses across the country.
Regional Australia will benefit most from Labor’s NBN policy. Gladstone, Emerald, North Mackay, Geelong, Seymour, Bega, Cooma, Batemans Bay, St Georges Basin, Ballina, Lismore, Grafton, Queenstown—these are just a few of the cities and towns that under Labor will get a first-rate, fibre optic NBN instead of Malcolm Turnbull’s second-rate copper NBN. Labor will also review wholesale pricing on the satellite to make it fair again.
Communities in the bush will always be better served by Labor when it comes to the NBN.
IMPROVING MOBILE SERVICES
Labor understands that a lack of mobile phone services is holding our regions back.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will continue to invest in the roll out of mobile services in regional Australia.
We will allocate a further $60 million to the Mobile Black Spot Program.
Importantly too, we will ensure this money is spent where it is needed, not where it does the most good for Liberal and National MPs.
Of the 499 mobile towers funded in Round 1 of the Mobile Black Spot Program, 416 are in Liberal and Nationals’ electorates.
There have also been some glaring omissions, with locations that should have been funded but were not.
For example, the electorate of McEwen is one of the most fire-prone in the country and there are 95 identified blackspots across the region.
Despite this, McEwen received just two of the 499 towers funded from Round 1 of the Mobile Black Spots Program.
Labor is committed to ensuring that regional Australians have access to the mobile phone services they need.
This is critical infrastructure that saves lives in an emergency and is also central to running successful agricultural businesses from our regions.
Infrastructure is one of the areas where regional Australians notice the gap between the services they receive and those on offer in our big cities most acutely.
Labor will work to close this gap because we understand the difference it makes both to quality of life and productivity in our regions.
STRONGER PEST MANAGEMENT
It is critical we protect Queensland graziers from the threat wild dogs pose to their livelihoods. That is why a Shorten Labor Government will invest $5 million to expand wild dog fencing across Western Queensland.
This funding matches the Queensland Government’s additional $5 million funding to bring sheep back to Western Queensland.
Labor is the only party that will help our resilient farmers in Western Queensland protect and replenish stock numbers that have been in decline because of severe drought and wild dogs.
Queensland graziers are well aware both the former State and current Federal Liberal-National Governments have not done enough to combat this plague.
This funding will ensure the success of the much larger wild dog control program with the ultimate goal of returning sheep in big numbers into Western Queensland, which will be good for farmers and good for sustainable agriculture productivity.
The extra funding will also benefit local contractors, particularly fencing contractors and agricultural supply companies.
TACKLING CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate change will severely impact on those families, farmers and businesses that depend on natural resources like agriculture, forestry and fisheries for their livelihoods.
That’s because climate change means longer droughts in parts of Australia, which are estimated to cost Australia $7.3 billion annually from 2020, reducing GDP by 1 per cent a year.
Such droughts will be broken by more damaging floods, more frequent bushfires and more severe storms.
Beyond the flashpoints of these events, there are the creeping, incremental consequences: A massive decline in agricultural production.
Irretrievable damage to the Great Barrier Reef.
Widespread shortages of urban water supply.
Spikes in global food prices.
Increases in heat-related deaths and increased airborne disease.
Heightened instability in the coastal megacities of our region.
The farming sector has made the most substantial contribution to emissions reduction in Australia over the past twenty years; largely through the land clearing restrictions placed on the sector at the State level as well as the successful Carbon Farming Initiative implemented by the last Labor Government.
It is in the national interest that the sector be able to exploit the new, enhanced export opportunities in a way that is consistent with responsible land management.
The forestry and agricultural sector represents Australia’s largest opportunity in coming years to sequester carbon pollution – through soil carbon methods, reforestation, avoided deforestation and more.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will continue to support the sector in these areas and will exclude agriculture from our proposed Emissions Trading Scheme.
Australia’s land sector emissions were around 135 million tonnes CO2e in 1990 or around one quarter of the national total; in 2014, they were just 14 million tonnes.
That huge reduction was overwhelmingly due to land clearing restrictions introduced in Queensland over time between 1999 and 2009 (some of which were supported by John Howard who understood the benefits in achieving the Kyoto commitment).
Not only was this reduction enormously important from a climate perspective; it also had a huge impact on biodiversity in the region.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will also introduce a “climate trigger” in federal legislation to allow the Federal Government to regulate broadscale land clearing.
In government, we will also explore other ways of ensuring that State land clearing laws are consistent with Australia’s international obligations and commitments; including by re-invigorating COAG’s National Vegetation Management Framework.
A changing climate is making farming more challenging as drought events become more regular and protracted.
We can’t have a productivity agenda without a sustainability agenda.
Government has a role to play in helping farmers make the adjustment to hotter and drier conditions.
That is why a Shorten Labor Government will resurrect Commonwealth, State and Territory dialogue of the kind previously carried out through the Council of Australian Government’s Standing Committee on Primary Industries, and put drought assistance
PRIORITY SECTORS
FORESTRY
Australia’s forestry sector employs around 70,000 Australians, predominantly in the regions.
The forest, wood and paper products industry is also Australia’s sixth largest manufacturing industry with an annual turnover of around $21 billion.
There is rightly much talk about Australia’s transition from the “Mining Boom” to the Asia Pacific’s “Dining Boom”.
But there is also an emerging “Fibre Boom”, driven by growing demand in Asia and at home, and the advent of innovations like Cross Laminated Timber and wood-to-plastics technologies.
Wood is a renewable product that stores carbon.
Increasingly it will displace energy intensive steel and cement products in the construction industry.
A Shorten Labor Government’s priorities in the forestry sector will be to: Lift the R&D effort.
Expand our plantation estate by working with private landholders, including farmers and Indigenous communities in the locations where plantations are most viable.
Bring the forest sector into the Carbon Farming Initiative as a means of incentivizing investment in plantations.
Identify key forestry infrastructure to lift productivity.
Lift Australian content in government procurement.
FISHERIES
As a country with an extensive coastline, fresh fish and seafood are an important part of our identity.
While millions of Australians enjoy recreational fishing, most of us also rely on commercial fishing and aquaculture for the fish and seafood we consume.
Productive and sustainable fisheries depend on the health of our marine ecosystems.
Australia has the world’s third largest marine area and we produce many high value species, such as lobster and abalone, for which there is strong demand in Asian markets.
Our fisheries sector has long been moving up the value curve.
However, because of limited nutrient upwelling and low nutrient run-off from the Australian landmass our surrounding seas are typically nutrient poor and not very productive by international standards.
Worldwide, aquaculture is the fastest growing primary industry sector. It now accounts for more than half the world’s seafood supply.
Australia’s clean, clear waters are ideal for aquaculture products, such as salmon, tuna, oysters, prawns, abalone and mussels.
Labor believes significant scope exists to increase our aquaculture production to create jobs and strengthen regional industries in places like Townsville.
Our key tasks will be to: Lift productivity and refine production techniques through investment in aquaculture research
Provide national leadership and planning for growth value industries such as the oyster industry.
Develop a national aquaculture policy that encourages community acceptance of the industry whilst simplifying aquaculture regulation and promoting sustainable development.
Australia’s five million recreational fishers also make a significant contribution to our regional economies.
Too often though, they are not properly consulted when Federal Governments are making decisions which can impact on them.
A Shorten Labor Government will provide $100,000 to establish a National Recreational Fishing Council that will give our recreational fishers a seat the decision making table.
Chaired by the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, the Council will include representatives of both recreational fishers and relevant government departments.
The Council will tackle issues like small pelagic fisheries management, boating and fishing infrastructure, conservation, access to national marine parks, national Gone Fishing Day and other issues of concern to recreational fishers.
WELFARE IN ANIMAL PRODUCTION
Protecting animal welfare and boosting agricultural profitability aren’t competing aims – they support one another.
The growing demand for high quality food produced in an ethical way means Australia’s agricultural producers must embrace the highest animal welfare standards to stay internationally competitive.
When last in government, Labor put in place a comprehensive animal welfare strategy and took a lead role in coordinating this through the Australian Animal Welfare Advisory Committee and the Standing Council on Primary Industries (SCoPI).
Since coming to office, the Abbott-Turnbull Government has abolished both the advisory committee and the SCoPI.
Minister for Agriculture Barnaby Joyce has also washed his hands of delivering the animal welfare strategy, instead shifting responsibility for this to an external industry body.
This has left a vacuum of leadership and direction when it comes to protecting and improving animal welfare in this country.
Labor will step up where the Abbott-Turnbull Government has failed by re-establishing national leadership on animal welfare in Australia.
A Shorten Labor Government will:  Establish an independent Inspector-General of Animal Welfare.
Re-build State and Territory cooperation on animal welfare matters, including by establishing an independent Office of Animal Welfare.
Renew the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy.
Review the Exporter Supply Chain Assurance System.
Provide more transparency and accountability.
Ban animal testing for cosmetics within Australia and the importation or sale of new products tested on animals overseas.
In delivering our plan to better protect animal welfare, Labor will consult with State and Territory Governments and stakeholders across primary industry to ensure these policies promote international competitiveness for producers and do not undercut it.
A UNITED LABOR TEAM WILL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
From the day Bill Shorten became Leader, Labor’s team has remained united, with a single-minded commitment to deliver those policies that put people first.
A healthcare system underpinned by Medicare.
An education system that gives every child in every school more individual attention – Public, Catholic or Independent.
University and TAFE that is accessible for all.
WE HAVE PUT FORWARD OUR POSITIVE PLANS.
WE ARE UNITED.
WE ARE READY.
WE'LL PUT PEOPLE FIRST
