Our Plan
In this very uncertain world, Australia needs political stability and a strong economic plan for jobs and families.
Australia is transitioning from the mining construction boom to a new and more diverse economy.
The Coalition’s Plan for a Strong New Economy is supporting this transition.
Our Plan will provide growth, jobs and a secure future for Australian families.
ISSUE 01
A Strong New Economy
In this very uncertain world, Australia needs a strong economic plan for jobs and families.
Australia is transitioning from the mining construction boom to a new and more diverse economy – fuelled by innovation
, the opening of new markets and more investment in Australian enterprise.
The Coalition’s Plan for a Strong New Economy is supporting this transition.
Our Plan will provide growth, jobs and a secure future for Australian families through:
An innovation and science programme bringing more great Australian ideas to market
, providing tax incentives to invest in start-up businesses
and helping prepare our children for the jobs of the future by boosting participation in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM).
A defence industry plan that will secure the nation
and supports innovative Australian companies.
, local advanced manufacturing and hi-tech jobs, particularly in regional Australia
Export trade deals to generate new business opportunities, give our farmers a competitive edge and open doors into expanding markets for our service industries.
Tax cuts and incentives for small businesses and hard working families.
A sustainable budget with crackdowns on tax avoidance and loopholes.
Guaranteed funding for health,
education
and roads
The restoration of the rule of law in the construction industry by re-establishing the Australian Building and Construction Commission.
We are restoring honesty and fairness to the workplace relations system.
Our Plan will deliver the benefits of a growing economy and a better community to all Australians.
Our Plan will deliver a strong new economy with more than 200,000 new jobs for Australian workers.
Our Economic Plan is seeing results:
The Australian economy is growing at 3% a year – faster than any of the G7 economies.
Around 300,000 new jobs were created last year, the strongest growth in employment since 2007.
But there is more work to do to continue the successful transition of our economy.
That’s why the Coalition is directing every lever of policy to secure our nation’s prosperity and economic security for the 21st century.
ISSUE 02
Innovation and Science Agenda
The Turnbull Government’s National Innovation and Science Agenda will help create a strong new economy with more jobs, by investing in the talents and ideas of the Australian people.
The Coalition is investing $1.1 billion to incentivise innovation and entrepreneurship and help bring more great Australian ideas to market, by:
Providing tax incentives to encourage investment in innovative start-ups so they can survive and thrive;
Attracting more venture capital investment into high potential start-ups;
Making it easier for aspiring entrepreneurs to access crowd-sourced equity funding;
Helping small businesses attract world-class staff by improving employee share schemes; and
Providing long-term funding certainty for cutting-edge, national research infrastructure.
The Agenda will also help prepare our children for the jobs of the future by boosting participation in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM) in schools.
The National Innovation and Science Agenda focuses on four priority areas:
Culture and capital – to help businesses embrace risk and incentivise early stage investment in start-ups;
Collaboration – to increase the level of engagement between businesses, universities and the research sector to commercialise ideas and solve problems;
Talent and skills – to train Australian students for the jobs of the future and attract the world’s most innovative talent to Australia; and
Government as an exemplar – leading by example in the way it invests in and uses technology and data to deliver better quality services.
For more details about specific measures, click here.
LINK: https://www.liberal.org.au/innovation
The National Innovation and Science Agenda
There has never been a more exciting time to be an Australian.
Advances in technology are transforming just about every part of our lives, from the way we work to the way we communicate and access services.
Innovation and science are critical for Australia to deliver new sources of growth, maintain high-wage jobs and seize the next wave of economic prosperity.
Innovation is about new and existing businesses creating new products, processes and business models.
It is also about creating a culture that backs good ideas and learns from taking risks and making mistakes.
Innovation is important to every sector of the economy – from ICT to healthcare, education to agriculture, and defence to transport.
It is about tech entrepreneurs working on the latest product
but, equally, about farmers using sensor technology to improve yields
or a business bringing new products to market.
Innovation keeps us competitive.
It keeps us at the cutting edge.
It creates jobs.
And it will keep our standard of living high.
Australia is well-placed to take advantage of the opportunities presented by these exciting times.
But to succeed, there are areas where we need to improve.
The National Innovation and Science Agenda will focus on four key pillars:
Culture and capital
Collaboration
Talent and skills
Government as an exemplar
Together these pillars provide a framework for Australian innovation policy.
The initiatives are worth $1.1 billion over four years.
The National Innovation and Science Agenda will drive smart ideas that create business growth
, local jobs
and global success.
Issues 3
Backing Small Business
Small business is the engine room of the Australian economy, employing 4.7 million Australians.
Small and medium businesses are driving jobs growth in Australia and must continue to do so.
That is why last year, we announced:
A 1.5 percentage point tax cut for incorporated small businesses with a turnover of less than $2 million per year;
A 5% tax discount for unincorporated small businesses;
Immediate tax deductions for each and every asset purchased up to $20,000; and
Immediate deductibility of professional expenses when establishing new small businesses.
The Turnbull Government’s Ten Year Enterprise Tax Plan will support growth, higher wages and jobs by lowering the tax rate for companies over time to an internationally competitive level.
We will: Cut the small business company tax rate to 27.5 per cent for small businesses with a turnover less than $10 million.
Increase the unincorporated tax discount from 5 per cent to 8 per cent, capped at $1,000 for small businesses with a turnover less than $5 million.
Extend access to the instant asset write off so that small businesses with a turnover less than $10 million can instantly deduct each and every asset under $20,000.
Make life easier by simplifying Business Activity Statements (BAS), reducing reporting labels from seven to three.
The company tax rate will be progressively lowered to 25 per cent by 2026-27 for all companies.
We are also supporting small business by:
Cutting red tape by $4.5 billion, including simplifying the process for establishing an employee share scheme and removing almost 450,000 small businesses from the PAYG system;
Opening new markets by signing export trade agreements with China, Korea and Japan;
Extending protections against unfair contract terms to small businesses; and
Appointing the first ever Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman.
The Coalition is also fixing Australia’s competition laws to help small to medium companies compete with larger established ones and to ensure they’re not shut out of markets unfairly by the big players.
Adopting the recommendations of the Harper Review, the Coalition will repeal the current Section 46 of the Competition and Consumer Act and replace it with a new provision that prevents firms with substantial market power from engaging in conduct that has the purpose, effect or likely effect of substantially lessening competition.
This will prevent the misuse of market power and benefit small businesses.
It will enhance competition, support innovation, benefit consumers and boost jobs and growth.
This is an important reform for Australia’s more than two million small businesses.
Issue 4
Cleaning Up the Construction Industry
The Coalition will reintroduce the Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC), to restore the rule of law in the construction industry.
The construction industry employs more than 1 million Australians, in around 340,000 (predominantly small) businesses.
Unfortunately, bullying, intimidation and lawlessness are rife.
As at March 2016, there were over 100 officials of the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) before the courts for allegedly breaching workplace laws.
Currently, around 2 out of every 3 working days lost to industrial disputes are in the construction industry.
Since Labor abolished the ABCC, the number of working days lost to industrial disputes in the construction industry has increased by 34%.
Re-establishing the ABCC is critical for jobs, growth and our transition to a strong new economy.
Restoring the rule of law to the construction industry is also critical for Australia’s ability to afford the infrastructure of the 21st century.
AN HONEST AND FAIR WORKPLACE RELATIONS SYSTEM
The recent Royal Commission into Trade Union Governance and Corruption found a “widespread” and “deep-seated” culture of lawlessness.
It concluded: “it is clear that in many parts of the world constituted by Australian trade union officials, there is room for louts, thugs, bullies, thieves, perjurers, those who threaten violence, errant fiduciaries and organisers of boycotts”.
The Royal Commission referred 93 individuals and entities for further investigation for breach of the civil or criminal law, but conceded “it would be utterly naive to think that what has been uncovered is anything other than the small tip of an enormous iceberg”.
The Coalition’s Registered Organisations Bill will restore honesty and fairness to the workplace relations system.
It will strengthen existing financial accounting, disclosure and transparency obligations and establish the Registered Organisations Commission – a new, independent regulator with increased powers to monitor and regulate registered organisations.
This will ensure union members can be confident their membership fees are being spent lawfully and in their interests – not in the interests of union bosses.
It will also ensure our workplace relations system delivers more jobs and economic growth.
Issue 5
Helping Families Get Ahead
The Coalition is committed to helping Australian families to get ahead.
MAKING A START ON INCOME TAX RELIEF
Middle income Australians are bearing a growing tax burden.
Without action, the average full time wage earner would face the second highest marginal tax rate this year and nearly half of all taxpayers would be in the top two brackets in ten years’ time.
The Turnbull Government is giving hard working Australians greater incentive to earn more without being taxed more.
The Government will prevent average full time wage earners from moving into the second top tax bracket until 2019-20 by increasing the 32.5 per cent tax threshold from $80,000 to $87,000.
This will stop around 500,000 taxpayers facing the 37 per cent marginal tax rate.
By pushing up the tax threshold on the middle tax bracket we’ll keep full time average wage earners on the lower rate for longer.
This will reward hard working Australians for doing more overtime, picking up more shifts, taking a promotion or a better new job, without being penalised by paying more tax through the higher rate.
This change also builds on the tax cuts provided to those on incomes of less than $80,000 to compensate for the carbon tax.
By abolishing the carbon tax and keeping this tax relief, we delivered a genuine tax cut for those earning up to $80,000 a year.
MORE ACCESSIBLE AND AFFORDABLE CHILDCARE
The Government’s more than $3 billion Jobs for Families child care package will make child care simpler, more affordable and more accessible for almost one million Australian families.
As a result of these reforms, families with incomes of between $65,000 and $170,000 will be around $30 a week – or $1,500 a year – better off.
A strong safety net will provide additional learning opportunities for children in low income families or at-risk children, as well as those in the care of their grandparents.
Under Labor, the cost of childcare increased by over 50% in just 6 years.
Our reforms will put downward pressure on child care costs.
To protect children from diseases, our “no-jab, no pay” rule is removing access to family and child care payments for parents who don’t vaccinate their children.
REAL JOBS FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS
To get more young Australians into work, the Turnbull Government has created a new Youth Jobs PaTH (Prepare-Trial-Hire) Programme.
Youth Jobs PaTH provides young Australians with intensive pre-employment skills training followed by an internship placement.
Up to 30,000 job seekers each year will gain a four to twelve week placement in an industry of their choosing.
And employers who hire an eligible young job seeker in an ongoing job will receive an accelerated wage subsidy of up to $10,000, paid over six months.
GUARANTEED FUNDING FOR HEALTH AND EDUCATION
The Government will also provide an additional $1.2 billion between 2018 and 2020 for schools, contingent upon reform efforts by the States and the non-government schools sector to improve education outcomes.
Because evidence tells us that increased funding alone won’t improve outcomes, we’re focussing on the quality of teachers and teaching, the teaching of reading and maths and the engagement of parents.
Through a recent agreement with all states and territories, the Turnbull Government will boost funding to public hospitals by around $2.9 billion (an increase of up to 6.5% a year) over the next three years.
As part of this Agreement, the quality of health care will be improved, with better coordinated care for people with chronic disease and by reducing the number of avoidable hospital readmissions.
PROTECTING NEGATIVE GEARING
We will not remove or limit negative gearing – that would increase the tax burden on Australians who are just trying to invest and provide a future for their families.
Negative gearing is used by over 1 million Australians, two thirds of whom have taxable incomes below $80,000.
BANNING EXCESSIVE SURCHARGES ON CREDIT CARDS
The Turnbull Government has passed laws to protect consumers by banning excessive surcharges on credit cards.
This will ensure customers are charged no more than the amount that reflects the merchant's costs in accepting that payment.
PROTECTING SAVINGS
The Coalition has also dumped Labor’s Bank Deposits Tax – to protect the savings of hard-working Australians.
This would have imposed costs of $1.5 billion on Australians with bank savings.
We also reversed a decision made by Bill Shorten as Financial Services Minister to take inactive bank accounts and life insurance policies after just 3 years (as opposed to 7 years).
This raid on savings by Mr Shorten meant $550 million was taken from 156,000 people in 2012-13 alone.
NO CARBON TAX
The Coalition will continue to fight Labor’s plans to reintroduce a Carbon Tax, which would put more pressure on family budgets.
The removal of their last Carbon Tax is saving average households around $550 per year.
Issue 6
Supporting Australian Exporters
Australia's export trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea – three of our four largest export markets – will set Australia up for the long term.
These agreements will grow our economy
, create jobs
and benefit consumers.
Independent economic modelling has found that together these three free trade agreements will, over the next two decades, create many thousands of new jobs
, make households more than $4,000 better off and boost GDP by almost $25 billion.
For Australian consumers and businesses, the new trade agreements will also place downward pressure on the prices of some goods, such as vehicles, electronics, clothes and household appliances.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP) promises even greater benefits for Australian exporters and investors in the fast growing Asia-Pacific region.
We are negotiating further export agreements with India, Indonesia, and regional and Pacific nations
and have agreed to negotiate an FTA with the 28-member European Union, creating even greater opportunities for Australian businesses.
CHINA
Australians are already benefitting from the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement through greater market access for Australian goods and services.
This is the most liberalising FTA that China has ever undertaken.
96% of Australian exports to China will be tariff free once this agreement is fully implemented.
Farmers will benefit with the complete removal of tariffs of key exports such as dairy, beef, lamb, wine, horticulture and seafood.
The China FTA also opens opportunities in China for Australian private hospitals
, providers of aged care services,
telecommunications companies and a wide range of other service providers.
JAPAN
The Japan-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement is the most ambitious trade deal Japan has concluded with any other country.
When fully implemented, more than 97% of Australian exports will enter Japan – the world’s third-largest economy – duty free or with preferential access.
The tariffs on our biggest agricultural export to Japan – beef – will almost be halved, while tariffs will be eliminated on other key agricultural exports, including a range of wine, seafood, processed food, fruit, vegetables and nuts.
Australia will also gain new levels of access to the Japanese market for a range of services.
Australian consumers will also benefit from downward pressure on prices for Japanese cars and parts and a range of household items including whitegoods and electronics through the elimination of tariffs.
SOUTH KOREA
Under this agreement, almost 100% of all Australian exports to South Korea will be able to enter duty free on full implementation of the Agreement.
Independent economic modelling estimates that, by 2030, exports of agricultural goods to South Korea will be 73% higher,
manufacturing exports will be 53% higher and.
mining exports will be 17% higher than would otherwise be the case
TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP
Our goods and services exports to the Trans-Pacific Partnership markets were worth $107 billion in 2014-15 – a third of all our exports.
The TPP will deliver substantial new trade and investment opportunities and greater access to the world’s most dynamic economies for our service industries.
Issue 7
A Stronger Defence Force
The Government has no higher responsibility than keeping Australia safe and secure.
The Coalition has a responsible, long-term plan for Australia’s national security.
The Coalition is committed to building a more potent, agile and engaged Australian Defence Force (ADF), ready to respond whenever our interests are threatened or our help is needed.
To do this, we will increase Defence funding by $29.9 billion over the next ten years
and deliver on our 2013 election commitment to return Defence spending to 2 per cent of GDP within the decade.
We are investing in new capability, including: A continuous naval shipbuilding program, commencing with nine Future Frigates and 12 Offshore Patrol Vessels;
Twelve new regionally-superior submarines to be built in Adelaide,
creating around 2,800 jobs;
Enhanced intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, space, electronic warfare and cyber capabilities; and
Support for Australian Defence Force personnel – providing them with the advanced training, modern equipment and health care they deserve.
The Government is also undertaking comprehensive upgrades of Defence infrastructure across Australia to support our larger future force, including at key bases.
This will also see the creation of local jobs.
A 21ST CENTURY DEFENCE INDUSTRY
We are helping Australia develop a 21st century Defence industry, by investing $1.6 billion over 10 years in programs to build industry skills and drive competitiveness, while harnessing Australian innovation and expertise.
Our Defence industry plan will also help to create advanced manufacturing and hi-tech jobs, particularly in regional Australia.
Unlike Labor, our Defence plans have been independently costed to ensure they are achievable and affordable.
LABOR’S RECORD
Labor in government ripped $18 billion out of Defence and cut Defence spending, as a proportion of GDP, to the lowest level since 1938.
Labor’s decisions led to 119 defence projects being delayed, 43 projects being reduced and eight projects cancelled, risking critical capability gaps.
Labor also failed to place a single order at an Australian naval shipyard during its six years in office.
Under Labor the Australian Defence industry shed more than 10% of its workforce because of budget cuts and deferrals, procrastination and lack of opportunity for Australian suppliers
Issue 8
Combatting Terrorism
To protect Australians from the threat of terrorism, the Government has boosted funding for our law enforcement, intelligence and security agencies by $1.3 billion since August 2014.
This investment is improving our intelligence capability and strengthening our border security against terrorism, crime and other threats, originating both here and overseas.
To keep Australians safe, the Government has also established:
The National Disruption Group – bringing together Federal agencies and state and territory police to coordinate counter-terrorism disruption operations;
An AFP Online Targeting Team to identify perpetrators online and collect evidence;
Australian Border Force Counter-Terrorism Units at all eight Australian international airports and fast-tracked biometric screening; and
The Foreign Fighters Task Force which is using its unique coercive powers and wealth of criminal intelligence to uncover terrorist networks.
AUSTRAC is now using advanced data analytics to detect and act against terrorism financing risks.
The Government is increasing its investment in Countering Violent Extremism programs, to protect young people from the risk of online engagement with violent extremists.
We are also contributing to the global fight against terrorism, through Australia’s military operations in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria.
The Coalition has also strengthened laws to help our agencies to monitor, investigate, arrest and prosecute home-grown violent extremists and returning foreign fighters.
This includes:The ability to arrest terrorism suspects on lower thresholds (several recent arrests to prevent terrorist attacks would not have been possible without this);
The suspension of passports at short notice where ASIO is concerned an individual represents a security risk;
The ability to cancel welfare payments on security grounds;
The retention of metadata for two years, which agencies say is essential to most counter-terrorism investigations;
The designation of declared areas, making it an offence to travel to certain areas in the conflict zone without a legitimate purpose; and
Legislation to ensure terrorists who are dual nationals can be stripped of their Australian citizenship
We have overseen the introduction of the new National Terrorism Threat Advisory System (NTTAS), which replaces the National Terrorism Threat System and the Public Alert System, to better inform the public about the likelihood and nature of an act of terrorism occurring in Australia.
In addition, the Turnbull Government is also working with the states and territories to introduce new preventative detention protocols.
LABOR’S RECORD
Labor cut over $700 million from the Customs and Border Protection Service budget.
Despite evidence of the growing terror threat, in six years Labor didn’t pass a single law to strengthen national security agencies.
Issue 9
Protecting Our Borders
The Coalition has stopped the boats.
We have restored the integrity of Australia’s borders and have stopped the deaths at sea.
The Coalition removed all children who arrived by boat from detention in Australia.
In contrast, Labor detained more than 8,500 children over six years.
Stopping the boats has also enabled the Government to close 17 detention centres saving the Budget $3 billion.
The Coalition has re-introduced Temporary Protection Visas,
commenced processing Labor’s legacy caseload of more than 30,000 illegal maritime arrivals and will continue to return those found not to be owed protection and those that commit serious crimes.
The Coalition has also restored integrity to the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme.
According to UNHCR data, Australia is one of the three most generous nations when it comes to permanently resettling refugees.
This year 13,750 places will be made available for resettlement in Australia rising to 18,750 in 2018/19.
Once again these places are going to those most in need around the world, not people arriving by boat.
Stopping the boats also enabled Australia to take an additional 12,000 refugees from the conflicts in Syria and Iraq.
The first of these refugees have arrived and they are starting new lives in Australia.
The Government continues to ensure that all visa grants are subject to strict security and other checks.
The Government has also established the Australian Border Force – streamlining and integrating agencies to better protect the nation’s borders and keep Australia safe and secure.
The Australian Border Force is partnering with the Australian Federal Police to combat border related crime, catch dangerous drugs like Ice at the border and target national security threats with dedicated Counter Terrorism Units at Australia’s major airports.
The Coalition will always be resolute in protecting our borders and we will stick to the policies that work.
LABOR’S RECORD
In 2008 Labor unpicked the successful border protection policies of the Howard Government.
As a result, over 800 boats carrying more than 50,000 illegal arrivals flooded into Australia.
At least 1,200 people lost their lives at sea.
Failed border polices also led to an $11 billion budget blow-out.
Australia must never return to this chaos and tragedy.
Issue 10
Building Australia’s Infrastructure
The Turnbull Government is investing a record $50 billion in Australia’s land infrastructure – to improve road and rail links, reduce travel times and support economic growth.
Roads to Recovery funding for local roads has been increased by 83 per cent, to $3.2 billion over the next four years
and $500 million has been allocated to fix road black spots, along with $300 million for the Bridges Renewal Programme.
We are also investing in important public transport projects, including the $95 million Gold Coast Light Rail, the Sydney Metro and the Melbourne Metro to improve access, amenity and liveability.
The Coalition’s commitment to the Inland Rail will transform freight movements through Victoria, New South Wales and South East Queensland and stimulate growth and prosperity in these regions.
After five decades of indecision, the Government is getting on with building a second airport for Sydney at Badgerys Creek and planning for a rail link.
As well, Infrastructure Australia has delivered the first ever 15 Year National Infrastructure Plan.
NEW SOUTH WALES
WestConnex
Linking Western Sydney to the city, airport and ports, with up to 52 traffic lights gone and 40 minutes saved.
Stage 2 construction commenced ahead of schedule.
10,000 construction jobs.
Western Sydney Airport and Road Infrastructure
Supporting Sydney’s second airport, by building vital road infrastructure first.
39,000 jobs created by 2035, increasing to 60,000 over time.
NorthConnex
Connecting the Central Coast to Sydney, avoiding up to 40 traffic lights on the Pacific Highway and 21 on Pennant Hills Road.
8,700 jobs.
Pacific Highway
Four lane divided road from near Newcastle to Queensland, with crashes reduced and travel times cut by up to 2.5 hours.
16,500 direct and indirect jobs.
VICTORIA
Monash Freeway
Additional lanes will unlock productivity in Melbourne by reducing congestion along the M1 corridor.
Murray Basin Rail
Upgrading over 1000 km of rail line to provide an alternative to road freight.
276 jobs.
M80
Completes the three remaining sections of the M80 Western Ring Road and improves traffic flow along one of Victoria’s critical freight corridors.
Great Ocean Road
Strengthening bridges and upgrading pavement, guardrails, cliff and land slip sites.
Urban Congestion and Regional Roads Packages
A number of projects that will relieve congestion in urban areas.
Upgrading rural and regional road infrastructure in Victoria.
Princes Highway West
Duplication to help bring regional communities together and link key industries to markets.
QUEENSLAND
Bruce Highway
Upgrades to improve safety, congestion and flood immunity.
Reducing travel times for motorists and freight – including a range of safety packages and overtaking lane projects, the duplication of the Boundary Road interchange and the upgrade at Yellow Gin Creek south of Ayr.
Gateway Motorway North
Widening from 4 to 6 lanes, improving access and better connecting the Bruce Highway, Northern Brisbane and the Port of Brisbane.
1,000 jobs.
Toowoomba Range Crossing
Cutting travel times and removing traffic from Toowoomba Town Centre.
1,800 jobs.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Gateway WA
Reducing congestion around the Perth Airport and surrounding areas.
1,320 jobs.
Northlink WA
A new 40km highway to improve freight and save travel times through the Swan Valley.
Perth Freight Link
Providing a direct, free-flowing connection to the Port of Fremantle.
2,400 jobs.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
North South Corridor and Northern Connector project
Better connecting Adelaide’s port, airport and freight terminals.
The construction of a new 15.5 kilometre road linking the Northern Expressway to the northern end of the South Road Superway.
1,330 jobs.
TASMANIA
Midland Highway Upgrade
Upgrade between Hobart and Launceston, to improve safety and freight delivery.
234 jobs.
NORTHERN TERRITORY
Tiger Brennan Drive
Duplication to improve safety and congestion.
120 direct jobs; 30 for Indigenous Australians.
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA
Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility
Unlocking the economic potential of the North through $5 billion in concessional loans that will deliver major economic infrastructure.
Northern Australia Roads
Priority road projects in key strategic corridors in Northern Australia
plus targeted upgrades to key roads necessary for transporting cattle and improving cattle supply chains in Northern Australia.
FIXING THE NATIONAL BROADBAND NETWORK
We have put the NBN back on track to deliver high-speed broadband to all Australian homes and businesses by 2020.
In September 2013, fewer than three per cent of Australian premises could obtain a service on the NBN.
Today over two million homes and businesses can access the NBN and there are more than 900,000 active users.
By completion, every user will have broadband speeds 4 to 10 times faster than today’s average.
Our plan is the fastest and most affordable way to deliver better broadband to all Australians by 2020.
Under Labor, the NBN was the most poorly managed infrastructure project in Australia’s history.
Labor spent $6 billion in four years to connect just 51,000 users to the built network.
We are connecting more than 50,000 homes a month, compared to 51,000 in total under Labor.
The most recent nbn Corporate Plan estimates that reverting to Labor’s all-fibre plan would require peak funding of between $74 billion and $84 billion, and the rollout could not be completed until at least 2026 and possibly as late as 2028.
The Coalition’s nbn plan requires peak funding of approximately $49 billion and will be finished by 2020.
Issue 11
World Class Healthcare
The Turnbull Government is committed to providing Australians with world class health care.
HOSPITAL FUNDING
The Government has provided an additional $2.9 billion in public hospital funding over the next three years (an increase of up to 6.5% a year) through an agreement with the states and territories that places greater focus on patient outcomes, particularly when it comes to caring for patients with chronic and complex needs.
HEALTHIER MEDICARE
The Government is strengthening Medicare through the new Health Care Homes initiative, which will better coordinate comprehensive care for chronically ill patients.
GPs will be able to coordinate the medical, allied health and out-of-hospital services required by chronically ill patients on an ongoing basis to help manage their conditions, and in doing so keep them out of hospital.
From 1 July 2017, 65,000 Australians will initially participate in this program at up to 200 medical practices across Australia, ahead of a full national rollout.
PRIMARY HEALTH NETWORKS
The Government has introduced a system of Primary Health Networks to identify local health needs, improve patient access to primary care services and improve co-ordination with local hospitals and community services.
The Government has established 31 Primary Health Networks around Australia to improve access to local health services, by investing close to $1 billion.
MENTAL HEALTH REFORMS
The Turnbull Government is delivering significant reforms that will put the individual needs of patients at the centre of our mental health system.
These reforms will reshape the delivery of primary mental health services towards a more modern, flexible model of care, rather than the current “one-size-fits-all” approach.
CHEAPER MEDICINES
The Government is making medicines cheaper – in some cases by as much as 60% per script, saving patients with multiple chronic conditions as much as $500 per year.
Additional cost savings for many common medicines are due to come into effect in October 2016, as a result of changes to the way everyday drugs are priced.
NEW MEDICINES
The Government has put nearly 1,000 new and amended drug listings onto the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, ensuring these life-saving medicines are available to all Australians, including:
Keytruda, which is used to treat Melanoma;
Mekinist, which is used to treat positive Metastatic Melanoma; and
Perjeta, Herceptin and Kadcyla, which are used to treat Breast Cancer.
The Government has also invested $1 billion to subsidise breakthrough treatments for all sufferers of Hepatitis C.
These treatments would cost $100,000 per patient if not subsidised through the PBS.
MEDICAL RESEARCH FUTURE FUND
Australia is a world leader in the field of medical research.
The $20 billion Medical Research Future Fund is providing a sustainable source of funding for vital medical research over the long term.
NO JAB NO PAY
To protect children from diseases, our “No Jab, No Pay” rule is removing access to family and child care payments for parents who don’t vaccinate their children.
Issue 12
Putting Students First
The Turnbull Government is investing record levels in our schools with total Commonwealth funds reaching $73.6 billion over the next four years.
This is an increase of 26%.
School funding will continue to increase each and every year going forward.
As part of this, the Government is providing an additional $1.2 billion between 2018 and 2020 for schools, contingent upon reform efforts by the States and the non-government schools sector to improve education outcomes.
The Turnbull Government is focused not just on more money but on making sure money is invested where it can make the most difference to student results.
Through our Students First approach, we are working with states and territories to focus on the four key areas that make a real difference to student results:
Better teaching quality
More school autonomy
Engaging parents in education
Strengthening the curriculum.
For example, our teaching quality reforms are introducing a new national literacy and numeracy test to ensure all new teachers are in the top 30% for literacy and numeracy in Australia.
Our National Innovation and Science Agenda is leading the way in promoting learning in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM).
SUPPORTING APPRENTICES
The Coalition Government is supporting apprentices through Trade Support Loans – helping apprentices with the costs of living, tools and training through loans of up to $20,000 each.
So far, over 40,000 loans have been taken up.
To help match the right apprentice to the right apprenticeship and lift completion rates, the Government has established the Australian Apprenticeship Support Network, supported by $200 million of annual funding.
This year the Government is supporting an estimated 68,000 employers with incentive payments to help businesses create opportunities for apprentices.
FIXING THE VET FEE-HELP SCHEME
To restore confidence in vocational education, the Coalition Government has taken over a dozen measures to crack down on dodgy providers, including strengthening the powers of the regulator and establishing a National Training Complaints Hotline for students.
Following consultation with the sector and the community, the Coalition will redesign the VET FEE-HELP scheme for 2017.
SUPPORT FOR UNIVERSITIES
Under the Turnbull Government, funding for universities is at record levels, with funding of over $16 billion in 2016.
Support for students is also at a record level, with $6.8 billion invested in 2016 (a 65 per cent increase on 2009 levels).
Australia has one of the most generous student loan schemes in the world, under which no domestic student has to pay up-front fees.
The National Innovation and Science Agenda will drive stronger university collaboration with industry through an additional $127 million in targeted research funding and new research impact measures.
Simply put, we are connecting our academics with industry in order to build commercial capacity
and create jobs in Australia.
MORE INVESTMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION
The Government is investing more than $3 billion in a new Jobs for Families child care package to make child care simpler, more affordable and more accessible for almost one million Australian families.
Families with incomes between $65,000 and $170,000 will be around $30 a week better off.
The Coalition Government is also ensuring all Australian children can receive 15 hours of preschool a week in the year before school (and exempting these 600 hours a year from the child care activity test).
INVESTING IN VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
The Coalition Government invests around $7 billion in the VET sector each year through funding and student loans.
This includes $1.8 billion to the states and territories to support their training systems, including TAFE.
Issue 13
Tackling Domestic Violence
Women and children in Australia must be safe in their homes, safe on our streets and safe online.
Domestic and family violence is never acceptable.
The 2016 Budget provides $100 million in new funding over three years to implement the Third Action Plan of the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2010 – 2022.
The National Plan is a 12-year strategy with a vision that women and children live free from violence in safe communities.
This builds on the $100 million Women’s Safety Package already being implemented by the Turnbull Government.
The package focuses on three key areas:
KEEPING WOMEN SAFE AT HOME
Innovative technology is being trialled and used to keep women safe, including GPS trackers for perpetrators, safe phones and safety devices for homes.
We are expanding support to counselling services such as 1800RESPECT and Mensline.
SUPPORT AND TRAINING FOR FRONTLINE SERVICES
Training is being expanded for frontline workers, including police, doctors, emergency department staff and social workers.
Domestic violence units are being established in legal services.
BREAKING THE CYCLE OF VIOLENCE
To address the negative behaviours and attitudes that can lead to violence, we are providing additional resources to help teachers, parents and students learn more about respectful relationships.
In addition, the Turnbull Government recently launched the ‘Stop it at the Start’ national campaign to change young people’s attitudes to violence.
This is a $30 million campaign, in partnership with state and territory governments.
Issue 14
Protecting Our Environment
The Turnbull Government is committed to protecting Australia’s magnificent natural environment.
PROTECTING THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
Our Reef 2050 Long Term Sustainability Plan is the most comprehensive plan ever developed to protect the Great Barrier Reef for future generations.
The Coalition has put in place an historic ban on capital dredge disposal in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park – ending a 100 year old practice.
$2 billion is being invested by Australian governments on projects that include improving water quality, reducing sediment and nitrogen run off, removing crown of thorns starfish and improving our scientific knowledge of the reef.
Our work to protect the Great Barrier Reef resulted in the World Heritage Committee declaring last July that Australia was a global role model for the management of World Heritage properties.
SUPPORTING RENEWABLE ENERGY
The Turnbull Government will double renewable energy in Australia over the next four years.
Under the Renewable Energy Target, more than 23% of Australia’s electricity will come from renewable energy by 2020.
We are supporting large scale projects, while at the same time making solar more affordable for households.
We are encouraging new technology to assist in the transition to clean energy, through the $1 billion Clean Energy Innovation Fund.
This Fund will target projects such as large-scale solar.
TACKLING CLIMATE CHANGE
To protect our environment for future generations, we need to tackle climate change.
As a country, we are playing our part in the global challenge on climate change.
Australia has signed the Paris Climate Change Agreement.
We are on track to beat our 2020 target by 78 million tonnes, and have set an ambitious target of reductions of up to 28% by 2030 based on 2005 levels.
That is equivalent to reducing emissions per capita by up to 52%– the second largest reduction of any G20 economy.
We will meet our targets without Labor’s Carbon Tax, which made electricity more expensive for all Australian families.
We are investing $2.55 billion to incentivise business to reduce their emissions through our Emissions Reduction Fund.
Projects we’ve supported include carbon farming to increase carbon in the soil
, energy efficient lighting for town councils
, supporting re-vegetation and bushfire reduction.
We are also implementing a National Energy Productivity Plan, reducing emissions from ozone-depleting gases and supporting investments in new technology such as solar storage.
SUPPORTING ON-GROUND ENVIRONMENTAL PROJECTS
Right around Australia, young local people are delivering environmental projects in their communities through the Green Army.
We have already launched more than 500 teams across the country.
We are investing $1 billion in natural resource management through the National Landcare Programme.
The Coalition will continue to deliver on our $50 million commitment to plant 20 million trees by 2020, with almost 10 million trees already committed for planting over the next three years.
As well, we are greening our cities as part of the Coalition’s cities agenda.
PROTECTING OUR THREATENED SPECIES
Australia has some of the most unique flora and fauna on the planet and we’re protecting our native wildlife with the launch of Australia’s first Threatened Species Strategy and the appointment of Australia’s first Threatened Species Commissioner.
The Threatened Species Strategy targets the key threats to our wildlife, in particular feral cats.
Funding for projects to protect our threatened species has already topped $190 million.
Our National Environmental Science Program is supporting this work, with projects that deliver research projects in the field.
PROTECTING AUSTRALIA’S HERITAGE
The Turnbull Government's Australian Heritage Strategy sets out the action we are taking to support and promote our remarkable natural, historic and Indigenous heritage.
Protection of Australia’s national and world heritage is a fundamental pillar of the Government’s environment policy.
Our natural, Indigenous and historic heritage enhances our sense of place and national identity and makes a positive contribution to the nation’s wellbeing.
ONE STOP SHOP
We have maintained environmental standards whilst reducing the red tape.
We have established a one stop shop for environmental assessments with every state and territory – cutting the double handling of assessments for projects.
