Australia
Since inception, Australia has been built upon the advancement of individual's rights and freedoms.
Katter's Australian Party believes it is the role of government to create and implement policy that advances individual’s rights and freedoms
, and overall, maintains the Australian lifestyle and national identity.
KAP believes government must make an additional, concerted effort to protect Australian sovereignty and independence.
In order to consistently achieve this, KAP seeks to maintain democratic representation federally, and support and propose policy that seeks to create opportunity in areas of education
, employment
, infrastructure
and local business.
For further details regarding KAP's position on contemporary issues, please refer to our policy stances:
Asylum seekers and border protectionClimate and EnvironmentEducationEnergyEssential public assets and infrastructureFirst AustraliansManaging public services commerciallyProtecting Australian jobs and Australian businessRural affairs and agricultureSmall business
Asylum seekers and border protection
Australia is a nation of migration.
Our first Australians migrated here some forty thousand years ago.
Since then we have seen our nation build on a diverse heritage of cultures that has contributed to our proud nation.
Our immigrant heritage is quintessential to being Australian.
It is not necessary to have been born in Australia to be Australian and it would be hypocritical to suggest that any person is undeserving of Australian citizenship simply because he or she wants a better life.
However, there needs to be a process of immigration that is fair to all who want to come to Australia and at the same time does not undermine the social or economic fabric of the nation.
Creating a framework that respects the rights and needs of people who seek to become Australians, to enjoy the lifestyle we largely take for granted, while preserving that lifestyle competitively for our own citizens, is perhaps one of the most perplexing issues we face as a nation.
It is a delicate balance of performing our humanitarian responsibility to those who are less fortunate than us without compromising our own existence.
This issue challenges the very notion of what it is to be Australian in the land of opportunity without a discriminatory class system.
“For those who’ve come across the seas we’ve boundless plains to share” Australian National Anthem.
The increasing trend toward illegal entry by boat, primarily via Indonesia, is problematic for three reasons: Firstly, the risk to life in making the perilous journey to Australia in barely seaworthy vessels is profound and unacceptable to both the migrants and the defence personnel deployed to intercept them.
The humanitarian implications of this situation are very publicly on display and public policy failures are impacting on Australia’s humanitarian reputation internationally and domestically.
Secondly, the sheer number of people trying to enter Australia is placing an unmanageable burden on Australia’s systems to receive, shelter and process these people.
Again, the humanitarian implications of this situation are very publicly on display and public policy failures are impacting on Australia’s humanitarian reputation internationally and domestically.
Thirdly, the ease of entry and inability to process the asylum seekers adequately is now posing an unmanageable national security risk with evidence mounting that undeserving and undesirable individuals are being inappropriately assessed and managed by immigration and security personnel.
Australian citizens are being forced to fund the entire program of interception, processing, transport and repatriation either in Australia or elsewhere.
In addition, national security is increasingly under pressure and the opportunity for entry by undesirables and the implications for Australian citizens if they are successful are profound.
Genuine asylum seekers are being caught up in a wave of irregular maritime arrivals and Australia is unable to deal with their circumstances in an appropriate and compassionate way and timeframe.
The success of the illegal transportation of people to Australia is providing an incentive to non-refugee aspirants.
In turn, this is creating a financial incentive to crews who transport them, placing all in harm’s way unduly.
KAP is obliged to address an asylum seeker policy.
“The parable of the Good Samaritan challenges us to understand that violence towards those who are the least powerful among us can take the form of legislative acts or of human indifference and disconnection.” Lilia Fernandez
KAP is committed to meaningfully deter asylum seekers from boarding boats in Indonesia or any other country in order to seek asylum in Australia.
KAP is committed to mitigate the financial cost of asylum seeker interception processing, housing and repatriation to the Australian taxpayer.
KAP is committed to demonstrate humanitarian compassion in balance with deterring unacceptably dangerous irregular  maritime arrivals.
KAP is also committed to reforming the processing of asylum seekers to end the extraordinary waste that is now expended in the industry that has sprung up around the detention of these people.
It is clear that the current bureaucratic process is ineffective and that the Department has no real capacity to competently assess the legitimacy of the claims by asylum seekers.
It is apparent that this aspect of the asylum seeker issue is not being addressed, while it is perhaps the bigger source of apprehension for the Australian public.
Subject to an initial security and health screening, KAP would require that if asylum seekers are to be granted temporary visas, they only be allowed to enter the community on strict social contracts that compel them to close monitoring until such time as the Australian Government is satisfied they pose no threat.
These temporary visas would also provide conditions in relation to settlement and assimilation into the Australian community, compelling a commitment to Australian culture, and compelling a productive contribution to the Australian economy.
Any breach of this kind of social contract would result in termination of the visa.
KAP will pursue policies in regard to asylum seekers and border security that: Commit to increase and enhance its fleet of patrol boats (to be made in Australia).
Restrict Australia’s migration zone to the mainland.
Any boat found in Australian waters, that is seaworthy and carrying asylum seekers, shall be turned around and escorted out of Australian waters.
Any immediate humanitarian needs of passengers or crew shall be met at interception.
Suspected people smuggler ring leaders and organisers who benefit substantially financially should be prosecuted vigorously and they should defend themselves at their own expense.
Asylum seekers claims are assessed quickly to screen for health and obvious security risks.
Successful refugees should only be granted temporary visas and conditional release into the community on a strict social contract subject to close electronic monitoring for a probationary period in lieu of detention.
Refugees on temporary visas should be employed/deployed in work for the dole type programs, particularly in the construction of their own housing and infrastructure requirements.
Climate and Environment
The reality is that we borrow the world from our children and grandchildren and we should strive to leave it in as good or better condition than we found it.
KAP is strongly committed to the philosophy of being “honorable ancestors” in the context of being climatic and environmental stewards.
Science is our best tool for understanding the world around us.
Science is responsible for the knowledge that has produced the technology we rely on in the modern world.
At this time, 97% of published scientific papers support the view that human activity is warming the climate, largely through the extraction of stored fossil fuels and that such warming has a high likelihood of resulting in adverse consequences.
This high level of scientific agreement is very unusual and other debates that have ultimately been resolved into widespread agreement have generally achieved a considerably lower level of scientific consensus.
The world has been warmer before, but not within the timeframe that we have built our global civilisation.
This is cause for considerable concern because our civilisation depends on climate stability in order to support the current global human population.
Global atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are now higher than at any time during the last 3 million years.
These high levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide are also impacting on carbon dioxide levels dissolved in sea water with resultant impacts on pH and likely dramatic ramifications for the entire oceanic food chain.
In view of the above points, KAP adopts the precautionary principle and agrees that global carbon dioxide emissions will ultimately need to be constrained to some degree.
Those constraints on emissions should remain in place unless or until such time that it can be reliably and scientifically demonstrated that unconstrained carbon dioxide emissions are unlikely to result in costly climatic disturbances.
In regard to the development of new power generation infrastructure, the cost of wind and solar energy systems will be no greater than fossil fuel generation systems.
Bloomberg New Energy Finance notes that wind is already cheaper than new coal or gas fired generation and solar soon will be.
These are critical points because renewables are often painted as expensive when compared to fully depreciated forty plus year old fossil fuel plants, but this simplistic cost comparison is not borne out when we fairly compare the cost of renewables against capital cost of new fossil fuel systems required to replace the ageing fleet or meet new demand.
There is, however, an ongoing demand for fossil fuels and KAP is committed to responsibly exploit the current energy market to maximise Australia’s competitive advantage in the provision of cleanest possible fossil fuels to meet the ongoing demand for as long as it persists to ensure the best possible economic outcome for Australia
and to extend the jobs in the current energy sector.
More broadly the same precautionary principles should be applied to other areas of environmental stewardship in relation to mining and extractive industries as well as other areas of human intervention on the land.
However, KAP does remain fully committed to the necessary development of natural ecosystems to pursue sustainable production systems to grow the economic prosperity of the nation.
In relation to climate and environment KAP will pursue policies that: prevent the extraction of coal seam gas within three kilometres of an aquifer
;
support and extend the Mandatory Renewable Energy Target;
mandate the use of ethanol;
provide direct and meaningful support to land managers in delivering ecoservices; and
support the right of farmers and other citizens to manage their resources and live without uninvited interference.
Education
Australia should be a world leader and innovator in the field of education; but our ranks are slipping, as globally we become less competitive and productive.
In order to provide future generations with the best possible opportunities, we must provide them with the best possible foundation – an education which is second to none!
KAP education reforms will ensure that all Australians, regardless of their circumstance, will receive a world class education; that means that not only will these reforms ensure that regardless of the school or State of enrolment, that students will receive the same benefits from the education system,
but this also means, that the education system must rival any other education system in the world.
Australia must aim to close the education gap, internally, within Australia, and externally, with other countries.
KAP recognises the necessary reforms required for our education system nationally.
However, the focus of such reforms should not only focus on budgetary and monetary constraints.
What is required is a significant overhaul of the current model used to teach Australia’s children.
It is obvious that the greatest impact is upon students and young Australians, who due to a failing system, are not given every possible opportunity, which should be available to them.
Ultimately, Australia as a Nation will suffer, unless there is immediate reform to the education system.
In today’s world, a proper education is not an option, but rather it is a necessity.
With technological advancements, and an interconnected global economy, Australia must advance to compete.
As a country, Australia is facing immediate challenges in terms of productivity and efficiency, the best way to resolve this, is with a better educated, more productive and more efficient workforce;
this will only occur with a significantly improved education system.
Furthermore, teachers, principals and those working to provide our future generations with the best possible opportunities are underpaid, under-appreciated and overworked.
KAP seeks to recognise the contributions of these people, and ensure that the educators throughout Australia are given the appreciation and reward that they deserve.
Background:
The 2011 Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) provides some very sobering statistics as to where Australia stands internationally with respect to education.
The following ranks are for students in year four, compared internationally: In reading skills, Australia is ranked 27th out of 45; and in mathematics, 18th out of 45; and in science, 25th out of 45.
Furthermore, 24% of year four students did not meet the “intermediate benchmark” for the study, regarded as the minimal acceptable standard of literacy.
Perhaps even more troubling, of the teachers surveyed in conjunction with the study, in year four classrooms, only 75% of students were being taught by teachers who considered themselves “very confident” in the subject matter they were teaching.
The studies show that by high school, Australia improves in the rankings, but is certainly not the front runner in education.
The following guiding principles form the basis of the KAP education reform:
KAP proposes to better utilise the existing funding, more efficiently and productively.
As with any organisation seeking structural change, the national education system must reallocate existing funding to facilitate better performance, and seek internal efficacy.
KAP proposes a more grassroots approach to education; removing the current hierarchal and bureaucratic structure will provide greater control to principals and teachers, dramatically reducing costs, and allowing for the reallocation of funds to where they are most needed; the schools, principals and teachers, and most importantly, the students.
Primarily, the focus should be on providing a solid foundation of reading, writing and mathematics.
This is required, as each stage of education should be considered as a building block, or stepping stone to the next, regardless of what that stage may be.
The foremost reform that KAP will introduce will be to develop the single most influential determinant to great teaching – the teachers.
Throughout Australia, KAP wants to recruit, promote, reward and most of all, celebrate, great teachers.
Undoubtedly, the key to the future success of Australia’s education system is great teaching.
KAP proposes that in order to provide a better education to young Australians, we must identify great teaching – and reward it!
In order to provide better outcomes from the education system, we must improve the quality and efficacy of teaching.
The single most important variable in determining the success of any student is the effectiveness of the teacher.
The reason KAP is focussing on the teachers, is that we realise that they are the solution to the education problem; the problem is the system in which they are forced to work.
The question then becomes how do we measure student effectiveness?
Through student growth; that being, it does not matter the standard of the student at the beginning of the school year, only that they have improved under the guidance of their teacher, and are able to do so year after year.
KAP wants to work closely with teachers who are passionate about developing standards and metrics which will allow for a useful and practical evaluation for ensuring student growth.
Upon implementation of such standards and metrics teacher remuneration would be directly linked by providing teachers with a base salary, with additional bonuses paid in accordance with demonstrated student growth.
Energy
The economy is completely underwritten by the energy market in Australia.
The challenge remains to provide adequate supply cheaply for today’s consumers while ensuring that the impact of the generation and consumption of that energy is not unfairly borne by future generations.
The energy market in Australia is complex and encompasses all forms from liquid, gas and solid fuel systems to renewables like solar, hydro, wind and geothermal systems.
The consumption of energy is also wide ranging in utilisation of electricity for stationary applications to fuels for transport and industry.
From a consumptive perspective the major energy products consumed in Australia are approximately coal (37%), oil products (35%), gas (23%) and renewables (5%).
Electricity has been primarily the domain of state governments historically, however increasingly the emergence of the interstate transmission grid has shifted the responsibility.
Increasingly there is an emerging conflict between corporatisation and full privatisation of electricity assets.
The ownership of generation and transmission assets is of primary concern to the national interests of Australia and a rethink of the role of the federal government in this space is now warranted.
Approximately 85% of Australian electricity is currently generated on simple cycle thermal coal fired power stations.
This generation technology is nearly a century old and the full impacts of this generation system will not be fully borne for generations to come.
Notwithstanding the long term impacts of relatively inefficient generation of 33% in energy conversion, the current electricity prices do not include capital or replacement costs for the fleet of generators that are fast approaching their decommissioning as they literally wear out.
Major generators are now coming off line and increasingly running below capacity.
It is becoming urgent to make decisions on infrastructure in this sector to ensure the Australian economy is not exposed to increasing volatility in supply and price of electricity.
Newer generation technologies must be incorporated to dramatically reduce the climate impact of our electricity needs.
For example, combined cycle gas turbines are much more efficient generators in the energy conversion sense, approaching 60%, effectively halving greenhouse gas emissions per kilowatt hour.
However there needs to be a much greater emphasis on incorporating renewables and newer technologies into the generation mix to replace the ageing fleet of generators in an orderly fashion without exposing the economy to price or supply shocks.
Beyond electricity, Australian energy demands are massive in the form of oil and gas products.
Currently Australia consumes approximately 18.5 billion litres of diesel and 2.7 billion litres of petrol annually.
Intuitively diesel is more geared to commerce and industry with mining consuming approximately 30%, transport approximately 35% and agriculture about 2% of annual diesel usage.
Gas consumption currently stands at approximately 210,000 GJ of which manufacturing consumes approximately 40% and electricity and heating consume approximately 42%.
Clearly Australia is heavily dependent on fossil fuels to meet current demand.
It is unlikely that the current energy demands can be met cost effectively in the short to medium term through renewables.
However, current assets and infrastructure deployed in the Australian economy are unacceptably exposed to increasing fuel cost and supply volatility.
The “just in time” practice of supply in modern supply chains dramatically increases the social and economic risks associated with disruptions in the energy sector.
The Australian government has a responsibility to assure adequate supply at an affordable and stable price to ensure long term economic prosperity and effective public utility.
KAP will pursue policies that: Retain essential energy generation and transmission assets in suitable structures to ensure the public good and national interests are best served, including caveats on private investment
Establish an independent energy authority to ensure political expedience is disempowered in the development and implementation of the national energy plan
Develop a robust and effective national energy plan by 2015 to deliver energy security to the Australian economy with a tactical response to 2030 and a strategic positioning to 2050.
Invest in the national grid to improve generation and transmission efficiency both in terms of cost
and also environmental impact
Provide generational equity in the investment and deployment of Australian resources to achieve a stable energy future
Implement resource reserves that protect Australian supply of resources to meet domestic energy needs ahead of export demand
Support small business to optimise their energy efficiency and minimise energy demand, acknowledging the potential poverty traps that are increasingly occurring where time and cash poor businesses are effectively unable to mitigate rising energy costs.
Encourage ongoing consumptive energy optimisation to mitigate rising energy costs to contain inflationary pressures to cost of living
Essential public assets and infrastructure
It appears that up until the 1970s, Australian governments and industry were capable of conceiving spectacular nation building engineering works that significantly and purposefully added to the productivity and capital base of the country.
These assets included power stations and transmission lines, ports, railways, roads, grain handling facilities, airports, and dams.
Since then, we have seen increasing divestment by all levels of government of public built and funded infrastructure and assets.
The rationale that suggests that a commercial entity can better manage and maintain our essential assets than our Government, is an indictment on the quality of management in the public sector.
Such a revelation should prompt the reform of the public asset management capacity, rather than a weak capitulation to inadequate public service and subsequent sale of essential assets.
Often, the public assets and essential services that are sold off by government provide monopolistic market power to the purchaser.
The general trend is an immediate and short-term cost benefit to consumers as part of the purchase contract undertakings, but ultimately the cost of service or access increases disproportionately.
KAP is strongly opposed to the sale of essential public infrastructure.
KAP is strongly opposed to the notion that a commercial entity with strong financial motivation to act in self-interest can better manage essential services in the national interest.
One of the main triggers for the sale of public infrastructure is the run down in these assets and associated ongoing maintenance and renewal costs.
This results in depressed asset pricing at sale.
Often the real strategic value of the assets is not realised which means the tax payer ends up paying for the initial asset and subsequently, once the asset is privatised, paying for it again to the new commercial owners who seek a handsome profit on an asset that has been subsidised to them by the tax payer.
The decision to sell assets is often short-term rationale in relation to election cycle budget timeframes.
If this rationale had been at the front of mind of the nation at its inception, no nation building infrastructure would exist today.
It is essential that this thinking be reversed to facilitate retention and maintenance of existing infrastructure and to deliver new projects of meaningful benefit to the nation.
KAP is committed to ongoing investment in public infrastructure and the ongoing and timely maintenance of these assets for the benefit of all Australians now and in the future.
KAP is fully committed to investment in infrastructure for communications to ensure adequate capacity to support ongoing business investment across all of Australia and that rural and regional based people are not significantly disadvantaged.
However, the political hype around the National Broadband Network (NBN), is a disturbing example of the politicisation of public investment with overstated benefits of fibre to home infrastructure and gross incompetence with underestimated costs and a subsequent blowout of over fifty billion dollars.
KAP will pursue policies that: promote the construction of new dams for irrigation and hydro electricity generation
deliver better road and rail infrastructure to facilitate regional investment;
deliver more effective and efficient power transmission networks;
mandate a national interest test to the privatisation of any public assets;
prevent the sale of essential assets, public or private, including agricultural land and resource assets, to foreign companies and/or sovereign entities without caveats to protect the national interest;
and establish and promote a government bond market with a guaranteed yield of 5% for Australian citizens and super funds to establish a pool of money specifically for investment in infrastructure.
First Australians
Australian Aboriginal people are undeniably our First Australians.
These people have struggled under colonisation.
There is no doubt that the socio-economic circumstances of modern Aboriginal people in Australia reflects poorly on their treatment and consideration by past and present governments.
KAP is mindful of many appalling injustices that have been inflicted on the Aboriginal people and while there is awareness of these issues, the strong and determined focus is on how we can improve the circumstances and opportunities for them.
It is clear that the welfare system and the subsequent culture that has become entrenched in many communities has reinforced the decline of Aboriginal communities.
It is apparent that in pastoral areas, the 1964 wage decision that resolved equal pay for Aboriginal stockmen resulted in general unemployment for many stockmen and Aboriginal communities being displaced.
Subsequently these people have lost their purpose and connection to the land.
The injustice of unequal pay and subsequent employment discrimination has had a massive unintended consequence that will likely take generations to resolve.
KAP is committed to addressing the serious socio-economic issues facing many Aboriginal communities across Australia by working with the Elders and traditional leaders of these communities.
KAP does not support the federal intervention because the program is discriminatory and exacerbates the alienation of people who desperately need to regain a sense of self-worth and basic human dignity.
It is undeniable that the government has an obligation to protect those who are most vulnerable in our society, but this protection must be provided respectfully and genuinely.
KAP is concerned that Aboriginal people apparently “own” over twenty percent of Australian lands, but still do not enjoy the same title of this land as other Australians.
It is essential that all Aboriginal lands are able to be held under individual or collective title deeds.
It is essential that Aboriginal people have the opportunity and incentive to operate their land profitably and with purpose.
KAP is committed to programs of support that engage Aboriginal people constructively in the broader Australian community and economy with equality.
KAP will pursue policies that: provide inalienable title over Aboriginal lands either collectively or individually to Aboriginal people
end compulsory draconian and discriminatory “intervention and prohibition” laws and provide authority to community leaders to establish their own governance;
and maintain and extend the Community Development Employment Program and engage Aboriginal people in civil construction projects including building and maintenance of housing for their own communities.
Managing public services commercially
It is increasingly important that the public service be modernised in the context of improving productivity and reconnecting the sector with best commercial practice.
There is ample evidence of financial waste and damage including loss of life as a result of poor bureaucratic process with little or no accountability.
Increasingly the public service has become over administrated.
It appears that the emphasis within the public service has increasingly moved away from a performance based culture and there are few if any meaningful parameters to review performance collectively or individually.
Since the Liberal National Government took office in Queensland, there have been 14,000 front line jobs cut,.
but at the same time we have seen more than a 10% increase in the number of senior bureaucrats who earn over $100,000 per annum
This highlights the cultural shift away from delivery of services to tax payers in a meaningful or commercially relevant way by Government and is indicative of an increasingly disconnected Government culture nationally.
The provision of health,
Education,
Defence,
, and social security services
are the most important sectors of public service interaction with the community where administration is overshadowing front line delivery.
This overly bureaucratic culture is out of step with the broader private sector.
The subsequent culture of self-assessment by Government has in effect created a feedback loop that reinforces the bureaucratic system to amplify it’s disconnect from the expectations and needs of the nongovernment sector.
In addition there appears to be an increasing trend to politicise investment strategies that severely curtail necessary rigour in costing and assessing impacts of public investment programs.
The political hype around the NBN is an excellent example of the politicisation of public investment with overstated benefits of fibre to home infrastructure and gross incompetence with underestimated costs and a subsequent blowout of over fifty billion dollars.
KAP is committed to holding the public service sector to account in regards the delivery of services in the same way any successful private sector business operates.
KAP is committed to reforming the culture of senior levels of bureaucracy to ensure they are connected to and focussed on the needs of the tax payers they serve.
KAP is very conscious of the need to support individuals in the system and condemns the failure of Government to instil the necessary culture in the service.
KAP is not intending to erode pay and salaries for the public service sector of the economy.
KAP is committed to improving the productivity of the public service in terms of service delivery.
KAP will seek reform policies that: introduce and apply the right Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to the performance assessment of all bureaucrat managers;
review the APS or EL remuneration pay scale of all bureaucrat managers based on their performance and achievement against meaningful KPIs;
curtail the cost blowout of the NBN and restrict the rollout of fibre to the node rather than to the home;
;  encourage and protect whistle blowers as an important method of discovery of the real health and performance of the public sector;
and implement regular, random, independent and external professional audits of the public service sector.
Protecting Australian jobs and Australian  business
KAP is committed to maintaining a productive and affluent workforce.
It is essential that Australian businesses are able to compete internationally.
Australia’s necessary commitment to maintain a high standard of living to provide adequate health and aged care,
education
and infrastructure requires
a strong economy, which is underpinned equally by an affluent work force and thriving business sector.
It is clear that foreign owned corporations and big business have a capacity and will to undermine Australian pay and conditions.
It is also clear that Australian labour costs are higher than in many competing nations, increasing the economic pressure on margins for goods and services that are subject to international competition.
However, labour costs for Australian manufacturing, which has been hit hard by international competition, only attribute about 17% of the total costs in manufacturing.
This indicates that the solution to the pressures on international competitiveness are in fact much more complex than adjusting the labour market.
It is clear that if labour pay and conditions are undermined and more financial pressure is brought to bear on the workforce generally, the economy will implode.
Decreasing the rate of pay and/or the rate of employment results in less taxes to government, less money to business, less money to the private sector, resulting an almost immediate recession.
Any decline in the utilisation of a skilled workforce in Australia will simultaneously result in the decline of training for a skilled workforce.
This will create a long-term crisis in Australia’s ability to maintain a first world standard of workmanship on critical specialist services.
KAP is committed to protecting Australian jobs and maximising the productivity of the workforce to increase employment rates in terms of people in paid work, and more importantly, the people in full time work.
KAP is committed to achieving this through considered policies that actually support the industries and businesses that provide the employment opportunities, with a particular emphasis on small business.
Specifically, KAP will pursue policies that increase demand for Australian products and support Australian jobs and that will: ensure that all Australian Governments purchase only Australian manufactured vehicles where there is an Australian made vehicle suitable for the role;
mandate the use of ethanol in all Australian petrol to stimulate regional economies in the grain and sugar industries;
ensure that all uniforms purchased on Australian government funded contracts are manufactured in Australia using Australian materials where they are fit for purpose;
ensure that any construction contracts undertaken using Australian government funds will use Australian steel;
stop the use of 457 visas by big business as a means to replace or undermine Australian workers and Australian award pay and conditions;
mandate premium shelf space on Australian supermarkets for Australian manufactured goods;
aggressively wind back the market share and/or market power of monopolistic companies that control access to markets for Australian small business, like Coles, Woolworths, Graincorp, Glencore and CBH
commission Australian made naval vessels, including a new fleet of border protection patrol boats;
reduce interest rates and bring down the Australian dollar;
modify competition policy to give small business the same rights under the law as consumers; and
provide public sector investment in a range of infrastructure initiatives, such as dams, roads, railways, and airports.
Rural affairs and agriculture
Agriculture is the PRIMARY INDUSTRY in the Australian economy.
The reality is that the wealth of this nation was first defined in agricultural terms and it is fast returning as the driver of our future prosperity.
The rural and regional economy of Australia is increasingly dependent on farmers’ prosperity.
Similarly, as the resources boom begins to slow, the national economy is dependent on the export of Australian produce to bring in export income and provide a major injection of capital to the national economy to underpin sustainable economic growth.
No civilisation in history has survived long after it foregoes the importance of the economic viability of its agricultural production base.
Australia is one of the few countries that expects its agricultural producers to subsidise consumers domestically and internationally, by being forced to compete in markets with foreign producers who are heavily subsidised to increase production with little or no exposure to market or production risk.
In 1996, the National Farmers Federation (NFF) posed a question: “Why have farmers’ high productivity performance not translated to a more satisfactory profitability outcome for Australian farmers?”
In 2013 they are still asking the same question.
The aggressive trade liberalisation ideology pursued by consecutive governments over the past two decades has severely damaged rural industries and their communities.
Farm debt is steadily increasing while net farm incomes are not increasing with the debt.
This trend demonstrates market failure in the agricultural sector.
The result of successive government to deregulate agricultural market arrangements has seen increasing market power in the post farm gate sector of the supply chain and structural change that moves the profit in agriculture away from the producers.
Again, gross farm debt has been increasing steadily while net farm income remains constant.
This trend highlights the failure of agricultural market reform in Australia to deliver any benefit to the farm sector.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES), continually forecasts a bright future for Australian agriculture based on potential increasing demand due to a combined increase in population and increasing affluence in key markets.
Fundamentally though, the reality is that no central government in the world wants food prices to increase and the majority of the population growth is unlikely to be able to pay even the true cost of production for their food.
Engel’s Law is an economic truism that has been proven repeatedly, proving that the proportion of income consumers spend on food does not increase in line with their increasing income.
This phenomenon belies the notion that agriculture will benefit from increasing affluence in line with their inherent increasing agricultural production costs, which do not follow Engel’s Law.
In effect, the agricultural economy will always fall behind the broader economy with the free market mentality that economic rationalists have so fervently and recklessly pursued.
Free marketers are killing Australian agriculture and by extrapolation, rural and regional Australia and all industries that feed off it.
There is a public and politically promoted notion that it is the role of Australian farmers to meet the increasing global food challenge.
The reality is that Australian farmers are business people and their primary obligation is to feed, clothe and educate their own families and those who work for them.
This is becoming increasingly difficult.
If society generally wants Australian farmers to feed the world then there needs to be a strong market signal sent that underpins the economic success of current and future farmers.
KAP is committed to Australian agriculture and rural and regional Australia and believes that supporting Australian farmers will provide the necessary economic stimulation to reinvigorate this sector of the economy and ultimately underpin the Australian economy.
KAP will pursue policies that: mandate ethanol use in Australia, providing structural support to grain and sugar industries;
support the Mandatory Renewable Energy Target which will benefit rural infrastructure;
mandate the allocation of premium shelf space in supermarkets for Australian produce;
underwrite a national multi-peril crop insurance scheme to mitigate production risk;
reduce interest rates and manage the Australian currency down to improve the sector’s international competitiveness;
stimulate investment in infrastructure, including roads, rail and ports;
implement WTO compliant tariff’s to protect Australian producers and manufacturers where they are unable to compete with subsidised imports;
stiffen biosecurity conditions on imports and properly resource quarantine and inspections services;
provide an arbitrated price for agricultural produce where farmers request it;
establish a rural development bank to facilitate generational equity transfer;
implement “orderly” marketing where industry structures undermine reasonable market power to
producers (as perceived currently in dairy, egg and sugar industries);
and restore vital irrigation water to agriculture in the Murray Darling Basin.
Small business
The small business sector accounts for approximately two million businesses and employs over seven million people in Australia.
The employment in small business accounts for approximately two thirds of the Australian workforce.
It is clear that the health of the small business sector is a major single determinant of the health of the economy.
Successive Australian governments have professed to be concerned about the small business sector and still the regulatory demands on the sector see it pushed nearly to the brink and the decline is seeing significant reduction in business numbers and labour utilisation in spite of population growth.
Furthermore, the definition of a small business varies between the Australian Tax Office, Fair Work Australia, the Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
It is exceedingly unlikely that any Australian government has made any serious commitment to the small business sector when they have not even taken the time to define the sector.
Interestingly, not a single one of the many Australian definitions of the small business sector correlates with our major international competitors.
Australian government definitions range from: less than 15 employees by simple count rather than full time equivalents for Fair Work Australia;
less than 20 employees for the Australian Bureau of Statistics;
less than 50 employees for the Australian Tax Office;
less than two million dollars in revenue for the Reserve Bank of Australia; and
less than fifty million dollars for the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority.
Typically, small business operators actually operate the business they own or at very least have an intimate knowledge of the operation.
Similarly, most small business operators are not often “sophisticated”, in the corporate sense, and their primary skills tend to lie in the field of the service or production sector that the business operates within.
For example: A plumbing contractor is usually a plumber with a trade background, and is not a university trained business management graduate.
A farmer is usually skilled in production of crops or livestock, and is not a tax accountant or industrial relations lawyer.
As a result we see small business severely disadvantaged by government regulation and compliance, which does not differentiate between a large or small employer.
Small business operators are besieged by predatory and anti-competitive behaviour of big business.
Similarly, small business is increasingly besieged by the regulatory systems of government which are really targeting big business and indifferently catching small business in the crossfire.
The result is that we are seeing small business survival rates decline sharply and the rate of labour utilisation by small business contract even faster.
The increasing demands on small business administration and compliance do nothing to improve productivity or profitability and simply add cost to the business and demotivate the sector.
KAP is committed to supporting small business and recognises that it is the sector of the economy  most  able to drive growth and innovation in the Australian economy
and with meaningful support will provide the biggest growth in employment in terms of numbers of jobs and numbers of hours of work.
The Australian government has progressively pushed compliance requirements onto business in regards to the roll out of the administration of increasingly complex employee services such as tax collection and management and superannuation administration.
It is alarming that the superannuation industry is filled with highly trained accountants and administrators who do not pick up a pencil without charging someone and the government expects small business operators to perform all the accounting and compliance functions for superannuation at no cost.
The reality is that the cost of compliance and implementation of increasingly complex payroll management systems cannot be efficiently offset on small workforces that typically define small business.
KAP is committed to reducing red tape and compliance costs for small business
and recognises that the marginal unit costs to compliance to small business must be considered in contrast to the marginal unit costs to big business.
KAP is committed to seeing regulatory impact assessments for small business mandated for relevant legislation and regulation.
Specifically KAP will pursue policies that: provide a consistent definition of small business in Australia that ensures competitive advantage for Australian small business (less than 50 employee threshold preferred);
give small business the same rights under competition policy as consumers;
give small business the same rights under industrial relations law as employees;
mandate regulatory impact assessments specifically for small business;
establish a Small Business Ombudsmen with particular interest in predatory anti-competitive behaviour by big business and compliance cost burdens;
And provide separate award conditions for small business that recognise the difference between big business and small business, while still providing certainty to employees.
