OUR PLAN FOR A STRONG NEW ECONOMY
JOBS AND GROWTH IN REGIONAL AUSTRALIA
JOBS AND GROWTH IN REGIONAL AUSTRALIA
Key Commitments
Regional Australia is critical to Australia’s economic prosperity and is home to around one third of Australia’s population.
Regional Australia accounts for around 65 per cent of Australia’s export earnings by value and is a major source of domestic and international tourism.
45 cents in every tourism dollar is spent in regional Australia.
Regional communities are benefitting from the Coalition’s economic plan.
Our export trade deals have made it easier for regional businesses to export to Asia
and our tax cuts for small business are creating new job opportunities.
Regional communities are an attractive place to live and invest.
They have a strong culture of innovation, offer diverse employment options, and attract the skills and talent needed to build successful businesses.
While the opportunities for regional Australia have never been greater, the Coalition recognises that some regions have been impacted by the slowdown in mining, falling commodity prices and changes to the manufacturing sector.
The Coalition will boost jobs, investment and growth in regional Australia.
We will establish a $200 million Regional Jobs and Investment package to deliver regional jobs and growth.
The Regional Jobs and Investment package will incentivise local businesses to invest and employ,
enable regional communities to upgrade local infrastructure and deliver new skills and training programmes
The package will be delivered in partnership with local communities.
Community leaders and local experts will be engaged to assess the needs of regional communities and develop local investment plans covering the following three areas:
Business innovation grants
Local infrastructure
Skills and training programmes
The package will support regional communities to diversify their economies, create new export opportunities
and help boost regional jobs.
The Coalition will contribute $200 million to the Regional Jobs and Investment package and will leverage a further $200 million in matched funding. Individual regions will be able to access up to $30 million in funding.
Our commitment will boost confidence, jobs, investment, and growth in regional Australia.
Our Plan for Regional Jobs and Growth
Regional Australia is home to around one third of Australia’s population and is an important source of job creation and exports.
Regional Australia accounts for around 65 per cent of Australia’s export earnings by value and more regional businesses are benefitting from our export trade deals, particularly those in the agriculture sector.
China and Japan alone account for nearly a third of all Australian agriculture exports.
Regional Australia is also a major source of domestic and international tourism, with 45 cents in every tourism dollar spent in regional Australia.
The Coalition will support regional jobs by establishing a $200 million Regional Jobs and Investment package.
We will invest $200 million, leveraging a further $200 million or more in matched funding.
Individual regions will be able to access up to $30 million in funding.
The Regional Jobs and Investment package will support regional communities to diversify their economies, create new export opportunities and help boost regional jobs.
It will incentivise businesses to invest in new technology, machinery or equipment to innovate and grow within the region.
We will work with local communities to deliver the package.
Local experts will be engaged to assess the needs of regional communities and develop local investment plans covering the following areas:
1. Business innovation grants
The Coalition will provide matched grants on a competitive basis to help businesses invest in new technology, diversify operations, create new export opportunities
and deliver new sustainable jobs.
An example would be a manufacturing business seeking to invest in new technology, machinery or facilities to expand or diversify production.
This investment will enable regional businesses to innovate, provide new export opportunities and grow and employ.
Business innovation grants will support local businesses in regional areas, helping them to invest and employ more staff.
2. Local infrastructure
We will provide matched funding for regions to upgrade existing local infrastructure or invest in new infrastructure.
We will work with local communities to identify the local infrastructure priorities of our regions.
An example would be upgrading or investing in new tourism infrastructure such as a large coastal pier to attract more domestic and international tourists.
Investing in local infrastructure will help boost the productivity of our regions,
deliver more jobs,
and generate more local investment.
3. Skills and training programmes
We will work with local communities and regional employers to deliver targeted skills and training programmes for local communities.
Our local skills and training programmes will address regional skills shortages.
They will also support workers impacted by structural change to retrain and upskill.
These programmes will help to prepare Australia’s regional workforce for new and existing job opportunities.
4. Addressing regional youth unemployment
The Coalition’s Regional Jobs and Investment package will complement our $840 million Youth Employment Package and ongoing initiatives that are providing more job opportunities for young Australians.
Specific initiatives include: Support for employers, especially small businesses, to create new jobs
Youth Jobs PaTH (Prepare-Trial-Hire Programme)
Entrepreneurship Starter Packs to assist young Australians to start their own enterprises
expand the New Enterprise Incentive Scheme to more young Australians
Our commitments will help tackle youth unemployment throughout regional Australia, delivering more opportunities for local young people and their communities.
The Choice
The Coalition has a strong record of investing in regional Australia and our economic plan is delivering investment, jobs and growth.
We have invested more than $20 billion in regional infrastructure since the last election, including $6.7 billion for the Bruce Highway and $5.6 billion for the Pacific Highway.
The Coalition is investing $3.2 billion under the Roads to Recovery Programme and $1 billion to deliver the Stronger Regions Programme.
We have established a $5 billion Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility to encourage more private sector investment in economic infrastructure in Australia’s north.
We are also expanding our Mobile Black Spot Programme, which will fix around 4,800 mobile black spots and provide better mobile phone coverage for hundreds of regional communities.
These investments are delivering jobs and helping to boost productivity in regional Australia.
Our export trade deals are creating more opportunities for regional businesses to access new markets and increase sales.
Australia’s agriculture exports now exceed more than $45 billion a year and are benefitting from our trade deals with China, Japan and Korea.
China and Japan alone now account for nearly a third of all agriculture exports and demand for Australian produce continues to grow.
The Coalition has also overseen strong growth in domestic and international tourism, directly benefitting regional communities across Australia.
Tourism is a major driver of regional jobs and investment, with 45 cents in every tourism dollar spent in regional Australia.
Only the Coalition has a plan for regional jobs.
We will establish a $200 million Regional Jobs and Investment package to support regional communities to diversify their economies, create new export opportunities and boost regional jobs.
We will deliver the package in partnership with local communities and incentivise regional businesses to investment in new technology, machinery or facilities to innovate and grow.
The Coalition is delivering for regional Australia.
Labor’s policies will fail to deliver jobs and opportunities for regional Australia.
Costs
The Coalition will invest $200 million to deliver a Regional Jobs and Investment package to help boost investment, jobs and growth in our regions.
SUPPORT VETERANS AND THEIR FAMILIES
Key Commitments
Australians are proud of our veterans.
Our service men and women put their lives on the line for the nation and in the defence of our values.
Over 312,000 Australians rely on the government through support from the Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
These are veterans and their families, dependants, widows and children.
It is a community that is growing younger.
As the Department of Veterans’ Affairs notes: “In 2015–16, the under-70 cohort is projected to become the majority of DVA’s clients, with the proportion growing over the ensuing five years. By 2020, one-third of DVA’s clients will be aged under 60, and 20 per cent will be aged under 50.”
The Coalition is committed to ensuring that current and future veterans and their families have the support that they need.
As the Prime Minister said at the recent RSL National Conference in Melbourne, DVA will continue to look after veterans because they need a department dedicated to meeting their own special needs.
The Prime Minister has made it clear that no DVA services delivered through Medicare will be outsourced or privatised under the Coalition.
The Coalition has a strong record supporting our veterans.
We have ensured more financial support and services to individual veterans than ever before.
We delivered fair indexation for military superannuation.
The Coalition will continue to support Australia’s veterans by: implementing a veterans mental health package
streamlining the claims process for veterans and their families
implementing an annual Ministerial veterans statement
helping homeless veterans
promoting jobs for veterans and improving the veterans transition process
establishing a female veteran’s policy forum and supporting our younger veterans
supporting veterans’ concerns on Mefloquine
commemorating service and sacrifice
Our Plan for Veterans
The veteran community is a strong and an important part of the Australian ethos.
The Coalition is committed to ensuring that current and future veterans and their families have the support that they need though our Four Pillar plan: recognition of the unique nature of military service
retention of a stand-alone Department of Veterans’ Affairs
tackling mental health challenges for veterans and their families
supporting veterans through adequate advocacy and welfare services
The Coalition will continue to support Australia’s veterans.
1. Supporting veterans mental health
The Coalition will continue to support the mental health of our veterans.
We will do more to ensure greater support to veterans, veterans’ families, ex-service organisations and health care practitioners.
We will target early intervention to treat mental illness by: providing $6 million to support the establishment of the ‘Centenary Institute’ proposed by Phoenix Australia in Melbourne to work collaboratively in support of practitioners and ex-service organisations who work closely with veterans with mental health concerns
providing $3.1 million to further extend access to the Veterans and Veterans Families Counselling Service programme to include family members of current and former Australian Defence Force members who die by suicide or reported suicide; siblings of Australian Defence Force members killed in service related incidents; Defence Force Abuse Taskforce complainants; families of DART complainants; and adult sons and daughters (over 26) of post-Vietnam War veterans
Our commitment builds on the significant new investment the Coalition made to the existing non liability health care initiative to extend eligibility for mental health conditions to all current and former permanent members of the Australian Defence Force in the 2016 Federal Budget.
There has been extensive funding of research into the effects of military service on veterans and their families, however, there needs to be much more done to translate the findings of this research into practical assistance.
The Centenary Institute will provide clinical research and professional leadership for veterans’ health.
Early intervention and support for veterans and their families can reduce the onset and prevalence of mental health conditions.
Further expansion of the Veterans and Veterans Families Counselling Service will support access to veterans and their families and encourage them to seek help early.
To support children whose parent or parents are serving Australian Defence Force members or a veteran effected by mental illness including PTSD we have provided $2.1 million to the Kookaburra Kids Foundation.
Our commitment is important to helping veterans and their families cope and address mental illness.
2. Streamlining the claims process
The Coalition allocated $48.7m in the 2016-17 budget to commence work required to fix the antiquated DVA I.T. system to deliver better customer service for veterans, underpinned by better processes and technology.
We have also implemented a number of initiatives designed to streamline the claims process including an alternative dispute resolution model which will enable more cases to be finalised without going to a full hearing and a new case management system for the Veterans Review Board that will streamline processes and reduce backlogs.
In addition, we will increase the amount veterans can be reimbursed for obtaining medical reports from the current $457.50 to up to $1,000 at a total cost of $1.2 million over four years.
These reports are required by veterans to assist them as part of the appeals process.
These initiatives will make it easier for veterans to navigate the claims system and expedite the outcome of an appeal.
As part of the National Consultative process, the Coalition will establish a consultative forum comprised of advocates, pension officers and others involved in the DVA claims process.
This Forum will review the existing claims process with a view to identifying impediments and considering improvements to the system.
3. Ministerial veteran’s statement
The Coalition’s commitment to the ‘Four Pillars’ of support for veterans and their families will be made transparent through an annual Ministerial statement to Parliament on key issues impacting the veteran community and the performance of the Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
This will be a transparent process which will measure the performance of the Department and increase accountability to the veteran community.
4. Helping homeless veterans
Our nation owes a great debt to those who have put their lives on the line for us and it is therefore essential that the community support those veterans who find themselves homeless and at risk of homelessness.
Whilst the provision of social housing is clearly a state and territory responsibility there is much more the Australian Government can do to address this important issue.
We will: convene a meeting of State and Territory Ministers with responsibility for veterans’ affairs to address homelessness in the veteran community
require Commonwealth agencies to identify whether its clients are veterans and to make that information available to ex-service and other organisations which provide support for homeless veterans
work with the States and Territories to support a comprehensive nationwide study that brings together work already undertaken to obtain a thorough understanding of the extent of veteran homeless and what all levels of government can do to address it
5. Promoting jobs for veterans
The Coalition will implement a new jobs programme for injured and ill veterans, which has been successfully trialled in South East Queensland and South Australia.
The programme will enhance the existing support currently provided to veterans as part of the Department of Veterans’ Affairs’ rehabilitation programmes by providing a greater focus on vocational outcomes, enhancing engagement with employers, and improving coordination with Defence as veterans transition to civilian life.
Under the trial, around 60 per cent of the veterans involved were successfully placed into civilian employment.
The Coalition will work with ex-service organisations and non-profits such as Soldier On and Mates4Mates to ensure that our younger veterans are catered for.
Employment and transition policies will be geared towards highlight the value of employing veterans.
Working with ex service organisations including Soldier On and the RSL the Prime Minister will convene a forum in Sydney later in 2016 to promote the unique skills veterans can bring to employers and to find more effective ways for organisations to engage veterans and their families.
6. Creating a better veterans’ transition process
The Coalition will put in place a ‘Discharge with Documentation’ policy across the Department of Defence and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
This proposal will replace the current system where defence force personnel can leave the Defence Forces without the necessary documents that they need to claim benefits from other government agencies, including the Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
This policy will provide a more seamless transition for service men and women from the defence forces and increase the capacity and efficiency of the Department of Veterans’ Affairs in processing claims and serving veterans and their families.
To facilitate improved transition from the ADF to civilian life the Departments of Defence and Veterans’ Affairs will establish a taskforce to report back to portfolio Ministers on barriers to effective transition and suggested actions to address those barriers.
7. Supporting Female Veterans
The Coalition will establish a Female Veterans Policy Forum to provide a platform to help identify policy gaps and support initiatives to better support Australia’s growing female veteran community.
We will provide $600,000 to establish and run this forum.
Female veterans can face very different health and wellbeing challenges to their male colleagues and there is currently no specific platform to consider the needs of this group.
8. Supporting our younger veterans
The Coalition will provide $4 million for a range of projects that promote social inclusion and peer to peer support for our younger veterans.
This funding will be provided to ex-service organisations to assist younger veterans who engage with each other differently and don’t want to be involved in formal structures in the same way that their older colleagues may do.
This initiative will be targeted at projects that seek to engage and actively involve our younger veterans.
Examples of projects that could be supported include mentoring, team building, self-improvement and creative activities.
9. Supporting veterans’ concerns on mefloquine
The Coalition understands there is concern among some veterans about the potential health impacts of the anti-malarial drug Mefloquine.
The Coalition will support, and build awareness of the support available, to serving and ex serving ADF members and their families.
The Coalition will: establish a formal community consultation mechanism to provide an open dialogue on issues concerning Mefloquine between the Defence Links Committee and the serving and ex-serving ADF community
develop a more comprehensive online resource that will provide information on anti-malarial medications
establish a dedicated DVA Mefloquine support team to assist our serving and ex-serving ADF community with mefloquine-related claims, this will provide a specialised point of contact with the DVA
direct the inter-departmental DVA-Defence Links Committee to examine the issues raised; consider existing relevant medical evidence and provide advice to the Government by November 2016
10. Commemorations
The Coalition will continue to support the planned Centenary of Service commemorations through to 2018.
In August this year we will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the battle of Long Tan and the Vietnam War with a range of events including an official reception at Parliament House in Canberra, a stand to at the Australian War Memorial and a commemorative service at Australian Vietnam Forces Memorial on Anzac Avenue.
In the coming year we will commence planning with the Vietnam veteran community for appropriate commemorative activities to mark other significant battles that occurred during the Vietnam War including the 50th anniversary of the battles of Fire Support Bases at Coral and Balmoral.
We are committed to honouring the service and sacrifice of our veterans and in the 2016 Budget we provided $7.5 to refurbish and rebuild 3,800 war graves in Papua New Guinea that have deteriorated and to undertake essential safety and maintenance work at the Hellfire Pass Memorial Museum in Thailand.
The Choice
The Coalition has a strong record supporting our veterans.
We delivered fair indexation for military superannuation.
We provide $11.7 billion a year to support veterans, including through health care, income support pensions and allowances.
We invested $5 million for the Transition and Wellbeing Research programme, which is the largest study undertaken in Australia to examine the impact of military service on the mental health, physical and social health of serving and ex-serving personnel and their families.
We invested $46.4 million to expand the non-liability health care initiative so that any eligible veteran can now access mental health care services for post-traumatic stress, depression, anxiety, and alcohol and substance abuse.
We provided greater access to the Veterans and Veterans Families Counselling Service, which we expanded to include service in disaster relief and boarder protection operations, training accidents, medically discharged personnel, submariners and partners and dependent children of these personnel.
We expanded the Veterans and Veterans Families Counselling Service so that veterans and their families have greater access in more locations to the support they need.
The Coalition’s strong record on veterans is contrasted by Labor’s contribution.
Labor did not fulfil its 2007 commitment to ‘maintain a generous military superannuation system’.
By opposing legislation, Labor delayed fair indexation for more than 57,000 military superannuants on the Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Scheme and the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits scheme.
Labor postponed the full rollout of the National ADF Family Health Care Programme twice.
This has meant defence force families did not have guaranteed long term basic health care.
Labor reduced veterans’ advocacy and welfare funding by $1 million.
The former Labor Government cut this funding without consultation.
Labor did not address concerns regarding the ICT systems of Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
This has created delays in claims times and DVA’s ability to support veterans and veterans’ families.
Costs
The Coalition will invest $15 million to support our veterans and their families.
JOBS AND GROWTH IN TASMANIA
Key Commitments
The Coalition will invest in jobs and growth for Tasmania.
Nearly 7,000 jobs have been created in Tasmania since the Coalition came to government.
We are investing in Tasmania to increase jobs and deliver more opportunities for Tasmanian businesses and families.
We will deliver over $2 billion in funding for Tasmanian hospitals over the next four years.
Under the Coalition, total Commonwealth funding to all schools across Tasmania will increase by $62.0 million, a 16.8 per cent increase from 2015–16 to 2019–20.
We expanded the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme, created a Major Projects Approvals Agency to expedite investment in Tasmania, provided $400 million toward the upgrade of the Midland Highway, contributed an additional $60 million for the Tranche II irrigation projects managed by Tasmanian Irrigation, and are investing over $2.1 billion to acquire Australia’s new icebreaker and further support Tasmania as the gateway to Antarctica.
We are delivering for Tasmania.
The Coalition will continue to support jobs and growth in Tasmania by: ensuring security of Tasmania’s electricity supply by supporting a second Basslink interconnector
investing $150 million to relocate and expand the University of Tasmania’s (UTAS) campuses in the heart of Burnie and Launceston to increase higher education accessibility, participation, and skills attainment
partnering in a City Deal for Launceston to maximise the long-term benefits of the UTAS relocation, committing a further $7.5 million to the Council to renew the Launceston CBD, making it an attractive and accessible place to work, study, visit and live
investing $25 million in a locally-led Regional Tasmania Jobs and Investment Package
investing over $2 billion to make Hobart the world centre for Antarctic research
providing nearly $4 million to complete the Three Capes Track and boost tourism
committing $4 million to establish a National Institute for Forest Products Innovation with one hub located in Launceston
delivering infrastructure for Tasmania
providing more export opportunities and tax cuts for Tasmanian businesses
providing $1 million to the Cradle Coast Authority to enable the Cradle Mountain Master Plan to progress to an investment-ready stage
The Coalition’s plan for a strong new economy will provide jobs and growth and a secure positive future for Tasmanian businesses and families.
Our Plan for Jobs and Growth in Tasmania
Nearly 7,000 jobs have been created in Tasmania since the Coalition came to government.
We will deliver over $2 billion in funding for Tasmanian hospitals over the next four years.
Under the Coalition, total Commonwealth funding to all schools across Tasmania will increase by $62.0 million, a 16.8 per cent increase from 2015–16 to 2019–20.
Our funding will be directed according to need and tied to evidence-based initiatives to support student achievement, such as improving literacy and numeracy, and enhancing teaching quality.
We expanded the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme, created a Major Projects Approvals Agency to expedite investment in Tasmania, provided $400 million toward the upgrade of the Midland Highway, contributed an additional $60 million for the Tranche II irrigation projects managed by Tasmanian Irrigation, and invested nearly $2 billion to acquire Australia’s new icebreaker to further support Tasmania as the gateway to Antarctica.
We are delivering for Tasmania.
The Coalition’s plan for a strong new economy will provide jobs and growth and a secure positive future for Tasmanian businesses and families.
1. Supporting Tasmania’s energy security
Tasmania needs reliable energy supplies.
Families and businesses should have complete confidence that their lights will turn on whenever they need.
The Coalition will support a second Basslink interconnector to ensure energy security and help drive development of Tasmania’s renewable energy resources, subject to the final business case which we expect to be positive based on the preliminary report by the Hon Warwick Smith AM.
We commissioned a report into the feasibility of a second Tasmanian interconnector.
The report was driven by the energy challenges Tasmania was facing with the failure of the Basslink interconnector, low hydroelectricity dam water levels, and the need to investigate how to drive the development of major new renewable energy investments.
The preliminary report recommends that the Commonwealth and Tasmanian Governments commit to support the construction of a second interconnector, subject to the successful completion of the final business case and the early involvement of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
A second interconnector will play an important role in Tasmania’s long-term energy security and help drive the development of Tasmania’s world class renewable energy resources.
Along with the potential development of more than 1,000 MW of new renewable energy, a second interconnector could drive investment of around $3 billion for Tasmania.
As Mr Smith made clear in his preliminary report, there is a case for developing a second interconnector in order to ensure Tasmania’s long term energy security and open the pathway for more than 1,000MW of new renewable energy investment.
Given the financial complexities involved in developing the business case for a second interconnector and Tasmania’s renewable energy resources, the recommendation about a key role for the Clean Energy Finance Corporation is also welcome.
The Coalition looks forward to Mr Smith’s final report which is due by the end of the year. It will form a major part in determining the business case for the second interconnector.
We have taken a sensible approach to this important issue for Tasmania – one that is about delivering real jobs and investment for all Tasmanians.
2. Supporting jobs and education in Tasmania
The Coalition will commit $150 million to relocate and expand the University of Tasmania’s (UTAS) campuses in the heart of Burnie and Launceston.
Our commitment will support jobs and
increase higher education accessibility, participation and attainment.
The University of Tasmania makes an important contribution to the state, not only to the education system and social fabric of the community, but also to the economy.
The University is one of the state’s larger employers, supporting more than one per cent of all jobs in Tasmania.
Its expenditure is a little over two per cent of Tasmania’s gross state product.
The potential for the University to make an even bigger contribution to the future of the state is clear.
Key performance indicators are trending upwards.
Student enrolments are up by more than 35 per cent over the last five years, and its world ranking has lifted to 305th in 2015, up from 400th in 2010, in the Academic Ranking of World Universities.
The relocation and expansion of UTAS in the heart of Burnie and Launceston will generate 3,110 local jobs and $1.1 billion in economic output during the construction phase.
The UTAS campus relocation programme will attract 12,000 new students to higher education in the region over the next decade to help address the state’s educational under-attainment.
It will help boost Tasmania’s and Australia’s attraction as a high quality international education destination, attracting an additional 1,700 international students to the region.
International education is one of Australia’s largest services export and a major employer.
In Tasmania alone, international education generates $164 million for the economy and supports an estimated 1,440 jobs.
Our investment will build a fit-for-purpose university campus at Inveresk in Launceston, providing modern, world-class teaching, learning and research facilities.
The new Launceston Institute for Applied Science and Design building will strengthen the future of science, research and the STEM disciplines in Northern Tasmania.
Modern and accessible educational facilities that use the latest in technology-enhanced learning environments will be constructed at West Park in Burnie, adjacent to the CBD and West Beach.
The Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture will be relocated to this central site and have room to grow as it extends into applied agriculture, logistics, supply chain analysis and agribusiness.
Both new campuses will provide innovation centres that support entrepreneurship, startups and industry supply chain spin-offs.
Central to the UTAS transformation agenda is the need to increase significantly the number of Associate Degree places, which are of particular benefit to students who have never previously participated in further education.
The Coalition has supported extending the demand driven funding system to sub-bachelor places in universities.
Labor has twice voted against this in Parliament and has ruled it out in the future.
UTAS estimates 8,000 students would benefit from Associate Degrees in Tasmania.
The Coalition supports increasing the number of Associate Degree places, which will benefit UTAS and other regional universities across the country.
The University of Tasmania will also receive $1.3 million from the National Critical Research Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS) Agility Fund to ensure the continued effectiveness of the Integrated Marine Observing System.
The funding will enable UTAS to replace and upgrade priority infrastructure that will see the ongoing provision of data critical to the fishing industry, climate prediction and the resources sector.
NCRIS is a network of 222 institutions employing more than 1,700 highly skilled technical experts, researchers and facilities managers.
NCRIS facilities are used by more than 35,000 researchers across Australia and internationally.
The former Labor Government failed to provide ongoing funding for NCRIS.
The Coalition’s National Innovation and Science Agenda provided $1.5 billion to ensure that NCRIS continues to drive collaboration between researchers, government and industry to deliver practical outcomes such as the UTAS Integrated Marine Observing System.
3. Supporting jobs and smart cities in Tasmania
The investment in UTAS campus relocation will transform the CBDs of Launceston and Burnie, bringing thousands of students and new business opportunities that will energise these city centres.
The UTAS relocation presents a once-in-a-generation opportunity for long-term jobs and growth in Launceston which will only be realised with tight coordination and integrated planning across all three levels of governments.
That is why the Turnbull Coalition is partnering in a City Deal for Launceston and committing to invest in the critical infrastructure that will deliver it.
The Coalition will provide a further $7.5 million to the Launceston City Council to accelerate these benefits and renew the Launceston CBD, making it an attractive and accessible place to work, study, visit and live.
The programme of works will upgrade civic spaces with paving, tree plantings, street furniture and art.
New areas and amenities for on-street dining, events and play spaces will be provided.
Safety and amenity will be improved with CCTV and lighting installations.
The main bus stop will be relocated and upgraded.
Pedestrian access will be improved with widened footpaths, signage and smart technology apps to promote access between attractions and other precincts, including the new UTAS Inveresk campus which will connect to the CBD via a new pedestrian bridge.
An additional 55 wireless access points will be provided across the city providing seamless internet access all the way to the new UTAS campus.
The Launceston City Heart Project is a major development project, providing 138 new jobs during the construction phase and in excess of 317 direct jobs in the retail, tourism and services sectors in the CBD.
The award-winning $18.1 million Launceston City Heart project is the largest project ever undertaken by the City of Launceston.
Our investment in Launceston puts the Coalition’s Smart Cities Plan into action, with smart investment, smart policy and smart technology maximising the potential of all cities, big and small.
4. $25 million into a locally-led Regional Tasmania Jobs and Investment Package
The Coalition will invest $25 million into a locally-led Regional Tasmania Jobs and Investment Package.
Our jobs package will help create local jobs and growth,
build a highly skilled local workforce
take advantage of export opportunities and diversify the regional economy
Grants under the Regional Tasmania Jobs and Investment Package will be awarded through three streams: support for businesses to grow and bring forward expansion plans
building local infrastructure
investment in skills and training programmes to build a highly skilled local workforce
These grants will assist local businesses in Launceston, Devonport, Burnie and other areas across regional Tasmania to grow, as well as encourage new businesses to enter the region, creating new sustainable jobs.
Grants will attract at least matching co-investment so the total investment in regional Tasmania will be at least $50 million.
Previous Tasmanian jobs incentive packages since 2013 have demonstrated the enduring year-on-year returns that these packages bring.
For example, the recent Tasmanian Jobs and Investment fund will deliver 800 new jobs in Tasmania and leverage almost $100 million in new investment.
Our commitment will help ensure additional jobs growth and investment in Tasmania.
5. A global centre for Antarctic research
The Coalition is investing over $2.1 billion to enhance Tasmania’s status as a global hub for Antarctic research hubs and the premier Gateway to East Antarctica.
We have signed a contract for Australia’s new icebreaker, amounting to a $1.9 billion investment, with the custom built ship due to arrive in Australia in mid-2020.
More than $1.1 billion (around 80 per cent) of the operations and maintenance spend will be in Australia, with the majority expected in Tasmania.
The new icebreaker will help to further expand Tasmania’s role as the gateway to Antarctica, and is great news for jobs and growth in the state.
Australian company DMS Maritime Pty Ltd will project manage the overall ship design and building process and will then operate and maintain the icebreaker from its home port of Hobart.
The Coalition’s commitment to a new icebreaker is the single biggest investment in the history of the Australian Antarctic programme.
Our commitment will support operations and science and ensure Tasmania is the scientific partner of choice in East Antarctica.
In addition to funding for the icebreaker, the Australian Antarctic Strategy is supported with $255 million new funding – this includes $55 million for infrastructure and $200 million for sustainable ongoing funding for the Australian Antarctic programme.
A modern icebreaker is essential for the resupply of Australia’s Antarctic research stations and to lead a world-class science programme.
The state-of-the-art icebreaker will be uniquely tailored to meet Australia’s needs, and will be faster, larger, and stronger than the Australian Antarctic programme’s current icebreaker, Aurora Australis and also offers increased endurance and icebreaking capability.
The new ship provides a modern platform for marine science research in both sea ice and open water, and a moon pool for launching and retrieving remotely operated underwater vehicles.
The Coalition is making Tasmania a global centre for Antarctic research and science and the partner of choice in East Antarctica.
6. Tourism
Tourism is a vital part of the Australian economy, contributing more than $120 billion to the Australian economy last year.
Tourism is also critical to regional Australia, with 45 cents in every tourism dollar spent in regional Australia.
Over half (52 per cent) of Tasmania’s tourism businesses are located in regional areas.
Tourism is particularly important to jobs
and growth in Tasmania and drives nine per cent of Tasmania’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The tourism industry employs approximately 37,000 Tasmanians.
The Coalition will support tourism,
jobs
and growth in Tasmania.
Tasmania has been leading Australia in record growth in both domestic and international visitor numbers and expenditure and is well positioned to capture the demand of mainland Australians and the emerging middle class of Asia.
In 2015, international visitation to Tasmania grew by 20 per cent to 211,788 visitors and spend by these visitors grew by 34 per cent to $351 million.
In the same period, domestic visitor nights grew by 17 per cent to 10.9 million nights and overnight trip expenditure grew 20 per cent to $2.2 billion.
Consumer research by Tourism Australia found that one of Australia’s greatest drawcards is the quality of its natural attractions.
|Australia is rated number one in the world when it comes to world class beauty and natural environment, and Tasmania delivers on this quality in spades.
We will: provide $3.8 million to facilitate the completion of the Three Capes Track.
The Track is a shining example of Tasmania’s high-end eco-tourism offering.
Completion of the third track will create jobs during construction and allow its full potential to be realised, benefiting the Tasmanian economy.
provide $1 million to the Cradle Coast Authority to enable the Cradle Mountain Master Plan to progress to an investment-ready stage.
Our funding will support the development of a full business case and economic impact statement, further detailed design work and engineering advice, and the preliminary environmental assessments needed to enable the project to proceed.
provide $70,000 to undertake a demand study into the “Geeves Effect” tourism development proposal for southern Tasmania.
The “Geeves Effect” is a tourism proposal in southern Tasmania encompassing the development of a wilderness precinct for tourism accommodation and activity adjacent to the Tasmania World Heritage Area at Lake Geeves.
The “Geeves Effect” has the potential to unlock the tourism potential of Australia’s highest cliffs in one of the world’s most significant natural World Heritage Areas by creating an environmentally sustainable and demand-driving tourism drawcard.
These projects have the potential to create more jobs
and growth in Tasmania, providing unique destinations for tourist activity.
7. Establish a National Institute for Forest Products Innovation research hub
The Coalition will commit $4 million to establish a National Institute for Forest Products Innovation.
The Institute will operate as a dispersed network model with one hub in Launceston, based at the University of Tasmania, and another hub based in Mt Gambier in South Australia’s Green Triangle.
Each hub will receive $2 million in funding.
Forestry is worth $1 billion to Tasmania and employs close to 3,500 people across the value chain.
Our forests provide significant economic and environmental benefits to all Australians—so we need a clear plan for how we manage them into the future to capitalise on the opportunities before us.
To take full advantage of the Coalition’s commitment to the 20 year Regional Forest Agreements, the National Institute for Forest Products Innovation will support the forest industry’s focus on high-value outcomes and its contribution to low carbon, low energy economies.
Innovation in forest management, timber processing, wood fibre recovery, advanced manufacturing and the bio-economy will ensure a strong future for this critical Tasmanian industry.
8. Delivering infrastructure for Tasmania
The Coalition is investing nearly $1 billion in the infrastructure Tasmania needs.
We provided $400 million toward the upgrade of the Midland Highway, contributed an additional $60 million for the Tranche II irrigation projects managed by Tasmanian Irrigation, invested $60 million in Freight Rail Revitalisation and provided $26 million to upgrade the Brooker Highway.
Since the 2013 election, more than $45 million has been invested in local transport infrastructure projects.
Our investment in the Midland Highway is generating 260 jobs.
Further jobs are being created in local communities from our investments in local infrastructure around the state.
Tasmania is also benefitting from the Coalition’s commitment to extend from 2019 a number of programmes that fund upgrades to local roads including: Roads to Recovery – $400 million per year, Maintenance – $350 million per year, Black Spots – $60 million per year, Bridges Renewal – $60 million per year and Heavy Vehicle Safety – $40 million per year programmes.
We are also delivering an additional $60 million commitment to extend the successful Mobile Black Spot Programme.
9. Promoting exports
Trade and investment create job opportunities for Australians.
More than 450,000 jobs have been created since the Coalition came to government.
We delivered break-through free trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea and upgraded our free trade agreement with Singapore.
These free trade agreements are delivering thousands of jobs and growth opportunities for Australian businesses.
Up to 10,000 new jobs are expected to be created in the financial services sector alone by 2030.
In the first year of operation, our agreements with South Korea and Japan delivered real benefits for the agricultural sector: the value of Australian exports of fresh beef to Japan increased by 22 per cent to just over $1 billion; exports of bottled wine to South Korea increased 53 per cent; and China’s imports of fresh Australian lobster between January and March were triple those of 12 months ago.
The Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association has said that the China-Australia free trade agreement will: “…open bilateral investment opportunities in agriculture that have eluded us for far too long…It’s absolutely amazing when you see the scale and interest in Tasmania from here.”
The Launceston-based Oz Honey, the largest honey company in Tasmania, will see a 15 per cent tariff on honey products entirely eliminated over four years.
The Tasmanian Salmonid Growers Association has said: “This FTA [between China and Australia] clearly opens many doors for Tasmanian seafood producers. Tasmania is in a prime spot to benefit. Until now, the absence of a bilateral FTA with China has meant Australian producers and exporters have faced significant tariffs on agricultural products and have been at a competitive disadvantage with respect to countries that already have an FTA with China – including New Zealand, Chile and the ASEAN nations.” [2]
Tasmania will be a clear winner from our free trade agreements: Tasmania exported $116.5 million of milk and milk products internationally this past financial year.
Under our free trade agreement with China, the 15 per cent tariff on liquid milk is being progressively eliminated.
Tasmania exported $56.5 million of fruit and vegetables internationally this past financial year, including berries and carrots.
Under our free trade agreement with China, berries currently face a tariff into China of up to 25 per cent.
Carrots face a tariff into China of 13 per cent.
Both of these tariffs are being progressively eliminated.
Tasmania exported $147.1 million of seafood internationally this past financial year.
Salmon faces a tariff of 12 per cent on current exports to China, but under this agreement will be progressively eliminated.
Australia’s economy will be $24 billion larger by 2035 because of the Coalition’s free trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea.
The free trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea are forecast to create some 7,900 jobs this year and over 14,500 jobs in 2020.
10. Delivering a tax cut for Tasmanian business
The Coalition will deliver a corporate tax cut for Australia’s small businesses.
Our commitment will mean greater cash flow for small businesses, giving them more capacity to invest, grow their business, employ more people, and push their products or services into new markets.
From 1 July 2016, small businesses will have their corporate tax rate progressively reduced.
On 1 July 2016, the tax rate will fall to 27.5 per cent.
This 27.5 per cent rate will be gradually extended to all companies, before falling to 27 per cent on 1 July 2024, 26 percent on 1 July 2025 and 25 per cent on 1 July 2026.
Because not all small businesses are incorporated, from 1 July 2016, unincorporated businesses with annual turnover less than $5 million will be able to access an increased unincorporated tax discount of 8 per cent, capped at $1,000.
Our commitment will support Australian business and Australia’s tourism sector.
11. New mobile base stations in Tasmania under the Coalition’s $220 million Mobile Black Spot Programme
Tasmania will receive improved mobile phone coverage if the Coalition is re-elected as part of an additional $60 million commitment on top of the $160 million already invested in mobile black spots to extend the successful Mobile Black Spot Programme.
New mobile base stations across Tasmania in Blackstone Heights; Flinders Island; Beechford, Lefroy; Musselroe Bay; Gunns Plains; Sulphur Creek; Devonport; Yolla; Murdunna; Wilmot; and Lachlan will bring a much-needed boost to mobile coverage, providing benefits to emergency service operators, businesses, and residents.
This is in addition to the 29 base stations currently being constructed in Tasmania under our previous round of the programme for Melrose; Elliott; Gawler; Loyetea; Sisters Beach; South Riana; Takone; Nunamara; Lulworth; Targa; Rossarden; Mole Creek; Cramps Bay; Whitefoord; Bicheno; Buckland; Miena; Pyengana; Swansea; Tarraleah; Apslawn; Brandum; Goshen; Wayatinah; Okehampton Beach; Bothwell; Hamilton; Steppes; and Little Swanport.
The Coalition is investing $220 million into fixing mobile black spots; in six years of government Labor invested $0.
The Coalition’s $220 million plan to address mobile black spots will ensure that Tasmania has far wider and more reliable mobile phone coverage.
The Choice
The Coalition has invested in Tasmania.
We expanded the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme, created a Major Projects Approvals Agency to expedite investment in Tasmania, provided $400 million toward the upgrade of the Midland Highway, contributed an additional $60 million for the Tranche II irrigation projects managed by Tasmanian Irrigation, and invested nearly $2 billion to acquire Australia’s new icebreaker to further support Tasmania as the gateway to Antarctica.
We have also strongly supported the University of Tasmania over the last three years and are committed to lifting aspiration and education outcomes.
Over the last three years student numbers at UTAS have increased by 10 per cent and the Coalition has increased UTAS’ funding for teaching and learning by 23 per cent.
The university has received $68 million in ARC competitive grants.
UTAS also receives the second highest regional loading funding of any university from the Commonwealth.
It represents 4 per cent of those universities in receipt of the subsidy yet its share of the total pool is more than 13 per cent.
The Coalition has released a higher education reform policy options paper to enable further engagement with the sector and stakeholders to chart a path to a fair, accessible, affordable and innovative world-class higher education system.
Since 2009, taxpayer funding for student tuition has grown by 59 per cent while nominal GDP growth over the same period has been 29 per cent.
The growth in taxpayer funding for student tuition is at twice the rate of the growth in the economy.
When Labor was last in government it announced $6.6 billion worth of cuts to higher education and research.
The Coalition has supported extending the demand driven funding system to sub-bachelor places in universities.
Labor has twice voted against this in Parliament and has ruled it out in the future.
UTAS estimates 8,000 students would benefit from Associate Degrees in Tasmania.
The Coalition is delivering the largest investment in Australia’s infrastructure in our history as part of our economic plan for jobs and growth.
We have committed over $50 billion to 2019-20 in critical road and rail infrastructure.
Costs
The Coalition will provide a capped contribution of $150 million to the University of Tasmania’s $300 million plan to relocate and develop its Launceston and Burnie campuses.
We commit a further $7.5 million to the Launceston City Council to support the $18 million Launceston City Heart Project.
The Coalition will commit $4 million to establish a National Institute for Forest Products Innovation.
The Institute will operate as a dispersed network model.
The Coalition will provide $2 million to the establishment of the hub at UTAS in Launceston.
We will also commit $3.8 million to facilitate the completion of the Three Capes Track, $1 million to progress the Cradle Mountain Master Plan to an investment-ready stage and $70,000 to develop a demand study for the Geeves Effect tourism proposal.
A SAFE AND PROSPEROUS AUSTRALIA
Key Commitments
The Government is strengthening Australia’s national security and
enhancing our prosperity after years of mismanagement by Labor.
Our economic diplomacy strategy is delivering real benefits to Australian businesses and our economy and is generating jobs.
The Coalition’s emphasis on consultation and mutual respect is building trust in Australia as a reliable partner of choice in the Indo-Pacific region.
We are broadening and deepening our bilateral relationships with key strategic and economic partners including the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, India, Singapore and Indonesia.
We are keeping Australians safe from terrorism by cancelling the passports of foreign fighters, making it an offence for Australians to enter declared terrorist-controlled areas in Syria and Iraq and working closely with regional friends and partners.
We are refocusing Australia’s diplomatic, trade and development efforts on our region.
We are delivering a sustainable, effective and affordable aid program that helps developing countries reduce poverty and promote sustainable economic growth, giving priority to women and girls, education, health and aid-for-trade.
The Government’s student overseas study program, the New Colombo Plan, is supporting Australian university students to study and undertake internships in more than 35 countries in our region.
This is building a generation of future Australian leaders with deeper understanding of our region and relationships to last a lifetime.
The Coalition’s foreign policy prepares Australia for the opportunities and challenges of the 21st century by: expanding Australia’s overseas diplomatic presence
boosting Australia’s crisis response capability
establishing regional health security partnerships
supporting a Pacific Women Mentoring Programme
developing a contemporary foreign policy strategy that builds on our achievements and focuses on 21st century challenges and opportunities
Our Plan for a Safe and Prosperous Australia
The Coalition’s commitments will strengthen Australia’s international engagement
, protect our national security
and enhance the prosperity of the Australian people.
1. Expanding Australia’s overseas diplomatic presence
The Coalition will invest $58 million over four years to expand Australia’s overseas diplomatic presence as part of our economic diplomacy strategy, which is enhancing our country’s prosperity and creating jobs.
These new missions will increase market access for Australian businesses in the global economy, strengthen our national security, and enhance our ability to provide consular assistance to Australians working and travelling overseas.
Since 2013 the Coalition has established eight new diplomatic missions and Austrade posts – the largest single expansion in over 40 years.
2. Enhancing Australia’s crisis response capability
The Coalition will invest $8 million over four years to boost Australia’s crisis response capability.
We will establish a Global Watch Office, staffed 24 hours a day, to provide timely and accurate advice on emergency situations overseas, enhancing Australia’s capacity to respond to crises anywhere in the world.
The shooting down of Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 over Ukraine and other recent global emergencies, including terrorist attacks in France, Belgium and Turkey, and natural disasters in our region, have highlighted the need to enhance Australia’s crisis response capability.
3.Establishing a regional health security partnerships fund
The Coalition will invest $100 million over five years to establish a regional health security partnership fund to harness Australia’s world leading research institutions, scientific expertise, innovators and entrepreneurs to improve health outcomes in our part of the world.
The regional health security partnership fund will sponsor partnerships with academic, private sector, non-government and medical institutions to tackle the emerging health security risks in our region.
Our commitment will also support internships for Australian medical and research students and young professionals to undertake work in partner institutions in the region.
The Coalition’s commitment will be funded from the official development assistance budget.
4. Supporting a Pacific Women Mentoring Programme
The Coalition will invest $5.4 million over five years to support a mentoring programme that connects female leaders in Australia with emerging women leaders in our region.
Through exchanges and forums, Australian women will provide cross border support to emerging women leaders in the public and private sector.
The programme will encourage women to take on leadership roles, particularly in policy making, and deepen people-to-people links between Australia and nations in our region.
The empowerment of women in our region is a crucial pillar in building peace and stability.
The Coalition’s commitment will be funded from the official development assistance budget.
5. Developing a contemporary foreign policy strategy for the 21st century
The Coalition will develop a contemporary and comprehensive foreign policy strategy within twelve months of the election to build on our achievements over the past three years and to focus on the challenges, including new and emerging threats, and the opportunities that lie ahead.
The last Australian foreign policy strategy was produced by the Howard Government in 2003.
The strategy will include analysis of the international opportunities and challenges that Australia faces in the 21st century, and will guide foreign policy and diplomatic efforts for the future.
As a liberal democracy committed to the rule of law and an open export orientated market economy, Australia must continue to be a significant voice on the world stage to protect our national interest.
The Choice
The Coalition has delivered significant commitments to strengthen Australia’s foreign engagement.
Since the 2013 election, the Coalition has:concluded free trade agreements with three of our largest export markets – China, Japan and South Korea – after six years of Labor indecision and inaction
strengthened Australia’s national security, introducing new laws to keep Australians safe from terrorism and combatting ISIL in Syria and Iraq
launched a student overseas study program, the New Colombo Plan, to support Australian university students to study and undertake internships in the region
implemented an economic diplomacy strategy to support jobs and growth in Australia
promoted Australia’s interests at the United Nations Security Council, playing a lead role in the international response to the downing of Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 over Ukraine
opened eight new diplomatic missions and Austrade posts around the world – the single largest expansion of our overseas presence in 40 years
established the innovationXchange to develop bold and creative solutions to development challenges in our region
created new partnerships with the private sector to deliver development outcomes
strengthened Australia’s relationships with key strategic and economic partners including the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, India, Singapore and Indonesia
enhanced Australia’s engagement with Pacific Island countries, including normalising relations with Fiji and leading international recovery and reconstruction efforts in Vanuatu and Fiji following devastating tropical cyclones
established a school of government in PNG
Throughout its time in Government, Labor’s rushed decision making and obsession with the media cycle damaged Australia’s important bilateral relationships.
From unilaterally cancelling Australia’s live cattle trade with Indonesia to announcing a regional processing centre in Timor-Leste without proper consultation, Labor’s efforts focused on addressing its domestic political failures, rather than serving the national interest.
Labor would scrap the Coalition’s economic diplomacy agenda, which is creating new jobs for Australian workers through increased trade and investment.
Costs
The Coalition’s policy for a safe and prosperous Australia will not place additional costs on the Budget.
A STRONG NEW ECONOMY
In this very uncertain world, Australia needs a strong economic plan for jobs and families.
Our Plan will provide growth, jobs and a secure future for Australian families through:
An innovation and science programme bringing more great Australian ideas to market, providing tax incentives to invest in start-up businesses and
helping prepare our children for the jobs of the future by boosting participation in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM).
A defence industry plan that will secure the nation
and supports innovative Australian companies,
local advanced manufacturing and hi-tech jobs, particularly in regional Australia.
Export trade deals to generate new business opportunities, give our farmers a competitive edge and open doors into expanding markets for our service industries.
Tax cuts and incentives for small businesses and hard working families.
A sustainable budget with crackdowns on tax avoidance and loopholes
The restoration of the rule of law in the construction industry by re-establishing the Australian Building and Construction Commission.
We are restoring honesty and fairness to the workplace relations system.
Our Plan will deliver the benefits of a growing economy and a better community to all Australians.
Our Plan will deliver a strong new economy with more than 200,000 new jobs for Australian workers.
Our Economic Plan is seeing results:
The Australian economy is growing at 3% a year – faster than any of the G7 economies.
Around 300,000 new jobs were created last year, the strongest growth in employment since 2007.
The Coalition is directing every lever of policy to secure our nation’s prosperity and economic security for the 21st century.
SUPPORTING AUSTRALIA’S FARMERS AND EXPORTERS
Australia’s export trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea – three of our four largest export markets – will set Australia up for the long term.
These agreements will grow our economy, create jobs and benefit consumers.
Independent economic modelling has found that together these three free trade agreements will, over the next two decades, create many thousands of new jobs, make households more than $4,000 better off and boost GDP by almost $25 billion.
For Australian consumers and businesses, the new trade agreements will also place downward pressure on the prices of some goods, such as vehicles, electronics, clothes and household appliances.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP) promises even greater benefits for Australian exporters and investors in the fast growing Asia-Pacific region.
We are negotiating further export agreements with India, Indonesia, and regional and Pacific nations and have agreed to negotiate an FTA with the 28-member European Union, creating even greater opportunities for Australian businesses.
China
Australians are already benefitting from the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement through greater market access for Australian goods and services.
This is the most liberalising FTA that China has ever undertaken.
96% of Australian exports to China will be tariff free once this agreement is fully implemented.
Farmers will benefit with the complete removal of tariffs of key exports such as dairy, beef, lamb, wine, horticulture and seafood.
The China FTA also opens opportunities in China for Australian private hospitals, providers of aged care services, telecommunications companies and a wide range of other service providers.
Japan
The Japan-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement is the most ambitious trade deal Japan has concluded with any other country.
When fully implemented, more than 97% of Australian exports will enter Japan – the world’s third-largest economy – duty free or with preferential access.
The tariffs on our biggest agricultural export to Japan – beef – will almost be halved, while tariffs will be eliminated on other key agricultural exports, including a range of wine, seafood, processed food, fruit, vegetables and nuts.
Australia will also gain new levels of access to the Japanese market for a range of services.
Australian consumers will also benefit from downward pressure on prices for Japanese cars and parts and a range of household items including whitegoods and electronics through the elimination of tariffs.
South Korea
Under this agreement, almost 100% of all Australian exports to Korea will be able to enter duty free on full implementation of the Agreement.
Independent economic modelling estimates that, by 2030, exports of agricultural goods to South Korea will be 73% higher,
manufacturing exports will be 53% higher and mining exports will be 17% higher than would otherwise be the case.
Trans-Pacific Partnership
Our goods and services exports to the Trans-Pacific Partnership markets were worth $107 billion in 2014-15 – a third of all our exports.
The TPP will deliver substantial new trade and investment opportunities and greater access to the world’s most dynamic economies for our service industries.
Stronger Farmers, Stronger Economy
The opportunities for the agricultural sector are enormous.
We sit on the edge of the strongest growing region in the world, we have a developed agriculture sector with sound prospects for expansion, we have food safety, animal welfare, biosecurity and environmental credentials that are world-class and we have a well-educated and skilled workforce.
The Coalition is focused on delivering agricultural policies that deliver: increased returns for farmers at the farm gate;
a fairer go for farm businesses;
building 21st Century water, transport and communications infrastructure;
strengthening our approach to drought and risk management to boost farm resilience;
a smarter approach to farming based on a strong research and development system; and
access to premium markets.
Agricultural Competitiveness White Paper
The Coalition has delivered and implemented the Agricultural Competitiveness White Paper, a $4 billion investment in Australia’s farmers, strengthening the agricultural sector to ensure it remains competitive.
Through the White Paper, the Coalition is lowering tax, putting in place clearer drought support measures, cutting red and green tape, building infrastructure, encouraging trade, developing northern Australia and supporting business to innovate and create jobs.
The White Paper delivers the $500 million National Water Infrastructure Development Fund to plan for and build the water infrastructure, including new dams and pipelines, needed to secure growth in agricultural production and regional communities.
National Water Infrastructure Loan Facility
The Coalition Government will make available $2 billion over 10 years for loans to the state and territory governments under a new National Water Infrastructure Loan Facility.
The loan facility will be available from 2016-17 to enhance the capital available for water infrastructure projects, stimulating and accelerating investments in water infrastructure in regional areas by the states.
This will include the construction of new dams, pipelines and managed aquifer recharge projects that are economically viable and will generate affordable water to grow regional economies.
Access to affordable water will be a key influence over the extent to which Australia’s farm and food sectors can realise export growth opportunities and meet growing demand from population growth.
Drought assistance for farmers
The Coalition is committed to supporting farmers – as well as the rural communities they help to sustain – to prepare for, manage through and recover from drought and adverse conditions.
The Coalition has delivered more than $710 million in drought assistance and support to farmers and rural communities experiencing hardship.
$2.5 billion has been set aside over the next 10 years for drought concessional loans, on top of more than $426 million paid out in approved concessional loans to over 800 farm businesses so far.
We are delivering support to farmers in need by enhancing the Rural Financial Counselling Service and have introduced the Farm Household Allowance, which is a fortnightly payment that has so far assisted 6,000 farmers.
Research and Development
The Coalition has always been a strong supporter of the agricultural research and development (R&D) system including collection of grower levies supported by matching Commonwealth funding.
The Coalition delivering on its commitment to boost agricultural innovation and competitiveness by investing in the Research and Development for Profit program, for which $78 million in R&D projects have been approved.
In the White Paper the Coalition delivered a further $100 million for the R&D for Profit, extending the program to 2021-22.
INNOVATION AND SCIENCE AGENDA
The Coalition Government’s National Innovation and Science Agenda will help create a strong new economy with more jobs, by investing in the talents and ideas of the Australian people.
PricewaterhouseCoopers has estimated an innovation focussed Australian economy has the potential to add $37 billion to GDP in 2024 and as much as $136 billion in 2034
– as well as creating more than 540,000 new jobs.
The Coalition is investing $1.1 billion to incentivise innovation and entrepreneurship and help bring more great Australian ideas to market, by:
Providing tax incentives to encourage investment in innovative start-ups so they can survive and thrive;
Attracting more venture capital investment into high potential start-ups;
Making it easier for aspiring entrepreneurs to access crowd-sourced equity funding;
Helping small businesses attract world-class staff by improving employee share schemes;
Providing long-term funding certainty for cutting-edge, national research infrastructure.
The Agenda will also help prepare our children for the jobs of the future by boosting participation in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM) in schools.
The National Innovation and Science Agenda focuses on four priority areas:
Culture and capital – to help businesses embrace risk and incentivise early stage investment in start-ups;
Collaboration – to increase the level of engagement between businesses, universities and the research sector to commercialise ideas and solve problems;
Talent and skills – to train Australian students for the jobs of the future and attract the world’s most innovative talent to Australia; and
Government as an exemplar – leading by example in the way it invests in and uses technology and data to deliver better quality services.
For more details about specific measures, click here. (LINK to Australian Liberal Party webpage)
PROTECTING OUR BORDERS
The Coalition has stopped the boats.
We have restored the integrity of Australia’s borders and have stopped the deaths at sea.
The Coalition removed all children who arrived by boat from detention in Australia. In contrast, Labor detained more than 8,500 children over six years.
Stopping the boats has also enabled the Government to close 17 detention centres saving the Budget $3 billion.
The Coalition has re-introduced Temporary Protection Visas,
commenced processing Labor’s legacy caseload of more than 30,000 illegal maritime arrivals and will continue to return those found not to be owed protection and those that commit serious crimes.
The Coalition has also restored integrity to the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme.
According to UNHCR data, Australia is one of the three most generous nations when it comes to permanently resettling refugees.
This year 13,750 places will be made available for resettlement in Australia rising to 18,750 in 2018/19. Once again these places are going to those most in need around the world, not people arriving by boat.
Stopping the boats also enabled Australia to take an additional 12,000 refugees from the conflicts in Syria and Iraq.
The first of these refugees have arrived and they are starting new lives in Australia. The Government continues to ensure that all visa grants are subject to strict security and other checks.
The Government has also established the Australian Border Force – streamlining and integrating agencies to better protect the nation’s borders and keep Australia safe and secure.
The Australian Border Force is partnering with the Australian Federal Police to combat border related crime, catch dangerous drugs like Ice at the border and target national security threats with dedicated Counter Terrorism Units at Australia’s major airports.
The Coalition will always be resolute in protecting our borders and we will stick to the policies that work.
BACKING SMALL BUSINESS
Small business is the engine room of the Australian economy, employing 4.7 million Australians.
Small and medium businesses are driving jobs growth in Australia and must continue to do so.
That is why last year, we announced:
A 1.5 percentage point tax cut for incorporated small businesses with a turnover of less than $2 million per year;
A 5% tax discount for unincorporated small businesses;
Immediate tax deductions for each and every asset purchased up to $20,000;
Immediate deductibility of professional expenses when establishing new small businesses.
The Coalition Government’s Ten Year Enterprise Tax Plan will support growth, higher wages and jobs by lowering the tax rate for companies over time to an internationally competitive level.
We will: Cut the small business company tax rate to 27.5 per cent for small businesses with a turnover less than $10 million.
Increase the unincorporated tax discount from 5 per cent to 8 per cent, capped at $1,000 for small businesses with a turnover less than $5 million.
Extend access to the instant asset write off so that small businesses with a turnover less than $10 million can instantly deduct each and every asset under $20,000.
Make life easier by simplifying Business Activity Statements (BAS), reducing reporting labels from seven to three.
The company tax rate will be progressively lowered to 25 per cent by 2026-27 for all companies.
We are also supporting small business by:
Cutting red tape by $4.5 billion, including simplifying the process for establishing an employee share scheme and removing almost 450,000 small businesses from the PAYG system;
Opening new markets by signing export trade agreements with China, Korea and Japan;
Extending protections against unfair contract terms to small businesses;
Appointing the first ever Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman.
The Coalition is also fixing Australia’s competition laws to help small to medium companies compete with larger established ones and to ensure they’re not shut out of markets unfairly by the big players.
Adopting the recommendations of the Harper Review, the Coalition will repeal the current Section 46 of the Competition and Consumer Act and replace it with a new provision that prevents firms with substantial market power from engaging in conduct that has the purpose, effect or likely effect of substantially lessening competition.
This will prevent the misuse of market power and benefit small businesses.
It will enhance competition, support innovation, benefit consumers and boost jobs and growth.
This is an important reform for Australia’s more than two million small businesses.
CLEANING UP THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
The Coalition will reintroduce the Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC), to restore the rule of law in the construction industry.
The construction industry employs more than 1 million Australians, in around 340,000 (predominantly small) businesses.
Unfortunately, bullying, intimidation and lawlessness are rife.
As at March 2016, there were over 100 officials of the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) before the courts for allegedly breaching workplace laws.
Currently, around 2 out of every 3 working days lost to industrial disputes are in the construction industry.
Since Labor abolished the ABCC, the number of working days lost to industrial disputes in the construction industry has increased by 34%.
Re-establishing the ABCC is critical for jobs, growth and our transition to a strong new economy.
Restoring the rule of law to the construction industry is also critical for Australia’s ability to afford the infrastructure of the 21st century.
An honest and fair workplace relations system
The recent Royal Commission into Trade Union Governance and Corruption found a “widespread” and “deep-seated” culture of lawlessness.
It concluded: “it is clear that in many parts of the world constituted by Australian trade union officials, there is room for louts, thugs, bullies, thieves, perjurers, those who threaten violence, errant fiduciaries and organisers of boycotts”.
The Royal Commission referred 93 individuals and entities for further investigation for breach of the civil or criminal law, but conceded “it would be utterly naive to think that what has been uncovered is anything other than the small tip of an enormous iceberg”.
The Coalition’s Registered Organisations Bill will restore honesty and fairness to the workplace relations system.
It will strengthen existing financial accounting, disclosure and transparency obligations and establish the Registered Organisations Commission – a new, independent regulator with increased powers to monitor and regulate registered organisations.
This will ensure union members can be confident their membership fees are being spent lawfully and in their interests – not in the interests of union bosses.
It will also ensure our workplace relations system delivers more jobs and economic growth.
HELPING FAMILIES GET AHEAD
The Coalition is committed to helping Australian families to get ahead.
Making a start on income tax relief
Middle income Australians are bearing a growing tax burden.
Without action, the average full time wage earner would face the second highest marginal tax rate this year and nearly half of all taxpayers would be in the top two brackets in ten years’ time.
The Coalition Government is giving hard working Australians greater incentive to earn more without being taxed more.
The Government will prevent average full time wage earners from moving into the second top tax bracket until 2019-20 by increasing the 32.5 per cent tax threshold from $80,000 to $87,000.
This will stop around 500,000 taxpayers facing the 37 per cent marginal tax rate.
By pushing up the tax threshold on the middle tax bracket we’ll keep full time average wage earners on the lower rate for longer.
This will reward hard working Australians for doing more overtime, picking up more shifts, taking a promotion or a better new job, without being penalised by paying more tax through the higher rate.
This change also builds on the tax cuts provided to those on incomes of less than $80,000 to compensate for the carbon tax.
By abolishing the carbon tax and keeping this tax relief, we delivered a genuine tax cut for those earning up to $80,000 a year.
More accessible and affordable childcare
The Government’s more than $3 billion Jobs for Families child care package will make child care simpler, more affordable and more accessible for almost one million Australian families.
As a result of these reforms, families with incomes of between $65,000 and $170,000 will be around $30 a week – or $1,500 a year – better off.
A strong safety net will provide additional learning opportunities for children in low income families or at-risk children, as well as those in the care of their grandparents.
Under Labor, the cost of childcare increased by over 50% in just 6 years. Our reforms will put downward pressure on child care costs.
To protect children from diseases, our “no-jab, no pay” rule is removing access to family and child care payments for parents who don’t vaccinate their children.
Real jobs for young Australians
To get more young Australians into work, the Coalition Government has created a new Youth Jobs PaTH (Prepare-Trial-Hire) Programme.
Youth Jobs PaTH provides young Australians with intensive pre-employment skills training followed by an internship placement.
Up to 30,000 job seekers each year will gain a four to twelve week placement in an industry of their choosing.
And employers who hire an eligible young job seeker in an ongoing job will receive an accelerated wage subsidy of up to $10,000, paid over six months.
Guranteed funding for health and education
The Government will also provide an additional $1.2 billion between 2018 and 2020 for schools, contingent upon reform efforts by the States and the non-government schools sector to improve education outcomes.
Because evidence tells us that increased funding alone won’t improve outcomes, we’re focussing on the quality of teachers and teaching, the teaching of reading and maths and the engagement of parents.
Through a recent agreement with all states and territories, the Coalition Government will boost funding to public hospitals by around $2.9 billion (an increase of up to 6.5% a year) over the next three years.
As part of this Agreement, the quality of health care will be improved, with better coordinated care for people with chronic disease and by reducing the number of avoidable hospital readmissions.
Protecting negative gearing
We will not remove or limit negative gearing – that would increase the tax burden on Australians who are just trying to invest and provide a future for their families.
Negative gearing is used by over 1 million Australians, two thirds of whom have taxable incomes below $80,000.
Banning excessive surcharges on credit cards
The Coalition Government has passed laws to protect consumers by banning excessive surcharges on credit cards.
This will ensure customers are charged no more than the amount that reflects the merchant’s costs in accepting that payment.
Protecting savings
The Coalition has also dumped Labor’s Bank Deposits Tax – to protect the savings of hard-working Australians.
This would have imposed costs of $1.5 billion on Australians with bank savings.
We also reversed a decision made by Bill Shorten as Financial Services Minister to take inactive bank accounts and life insurance policies after just 3 years (as opposed to 7 years).
This raid on savings by Mr Shorten meant $550 million was taken from 156,000 people in 2012-13 alone.
No carbon tax
The Coalition will continue to fight Labor’s plans to reintroduce a Carbon Tax, which would put more pressure on family budgets.
The removal of their last Carbon Tax is saving average households around $550 per year.
A STRONGER DEFENCE FORCE
The Government has no higher responsibility than keeping Australia safe and secure.
The Coalition has a responsible, long-term plan for Australia’s national security.
The Coalition is committed to building a more potent, agile and engaged Australian Defence Force (ADF), ready to respond whenever our interests are threatened or our help is needed.
To do this, we will increase Defence funding by $29.9 billion over the next ten years
and deliver on our 2013 election commitment to return Defence spending to 2% of GDP within the decade.
We are investing in new capability, including:A continuous naval shipbuilding program, commencing with nine Future Frigates and 12 Offshore Patrol Vessels;
Twelve new regionally-superior submarines to be built in Adelaide,
creating around 2,800 jobs;
Enhanced intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, space, electronic warfare and cyber capabilities;
and
Support for Australian Defence Force personnel – providing them with the advanced training, modern equipment and health care they deserve.
The Government is also undertaking comprehensive upgrades of Defence infrastructure across Australia to support our larger future force, including at key bases.
This will also see the creation of local jobs.
A 21st Century Defence Industry
We are helping Australia develop a 21st century Defence industry, by investing $1.6 billion over 10 years in programs to build industry skills and drive competitiveness, while harnessing Australian innovation and expertise.
Our Defence industry plan will also help to create advanced manufacturing and hi-tech jobs, particularly in regional Australia.
Unlike Labor, our Defence plans have been independently costed to ensure they are achievable and affordable.
Labor’s record
Labor in government ripped $18 billion out of Defence and cut Defence spending, as a proportion of GDP, to the lowest level since 1938.
Labor’s decisions led to 119 defence projects being delayed, 43 projects being reduced and eight projects cancelled, risking critical capability gaps.
Labor also failed to place a single order at an Australian naval shipyard during its six years in office.
Under Labor the Australian Defence industry shed more than 10% of its workforce because of budget cuts and deferrals, procrastination and lack of opportunity for Australian suppliers.
COMBATTING TERRORISM
To protect Australians from the threat of terrorism, the Government has boosted funding for our law enforcement, intelligence and security agencies by $1.3 billion since August 2014.
This investment is improving our intelligence capability and strengthening our border security against terrorism, crime and other threats, originating both here and overseas.
To keep Australians safe, the Government has also established:
The National Disruption Group – bringing together Federal agencies and state and territory police to coordinate counter-terrorism disruption operations;
An AFP Online Targeting Team to identify perpetrators online and collect evidence;
Australian Border Force Counter-Terrorism Units at all eight Australian international airports and fast-tracked biometric screening; and
The Foreign Fighters Task Force which is using its unique coercive powers and wealth of criminal intelligence to uncover terrorist networks.
AUSTRAC is now using advanced data analytics to detect and act against terrorism financing risks.
The Government is increasing its investment in Countering Violent Extremism programs, to protect young people from the risk of online engagement with violent extremists.
We are also contributing to the global fight against terrorism, through Australia’s military operations in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria.
The Coalition has also strengthened laws to help our agencies to monitor, investigate, arrest and prosecute home-grown violent extremists and returning foreign fighters.
This includes:The ability to arrest terrorism suspects on lower thresholds (several recent arrests to prevent terrorist attacks would not have been possible without this);
The suspension of passports at short notice where ASIO is concerned an individual represents a security risk;
The ability to cancel welfare payments on security grounds;
The retention of metadata for two years, which agencies say is essential to most counter-terrorism investigations;
The designation of declared areas, making it an offence to travel to certain areas in the conflict zone without a legitimate purpose; and
Legislation to ensure terrorists who are dual nationals can be stripped of their Australian citizenship.
We have overseen the introduction of the new National Terrorism Threat Advisory System (NTTAS), which replaces the National Terrorism Threat System and the Public Alert System, to better inform the public about the likelihood and nature of an act of terrorism occurring in Australia.
In addition, the Coalition Government is also working with the states and territories to introduce new preventative detention protocols.
Labor’s record
Labor cut over $700 million from the Customs and Border Protection Service budget.
Despite evidence of the growing terror threat, in six years Labor didn’t pass a single law to strengthen national security agencies.
BUILDING AUSTRALIA’S INFRASTRUCTURE
The Coalition Government is investing a record $50 billion in Australia’s land infrastructure – to improve road and rail links, build dams and pipelines and support economic growth.
The Roads to Recovery funding for local roads has been increased by 83%, to $3.2 billion over the next four years
and $500 million has been allocated to fix road black spots, along with $300 million for the Bridges Renewal Programme.
As well as $248 million for the Heavy Vehicle Safety and Productivity Programme for road upgrades on key freight routes to make them safer and boost productivity;
the Coalition’s commitment to the Inland Rail will transform freight movements through Victoria, NSW and South East Queensland and stimulate growth and prosperity in these regions.
As well, Infrastructure Australia has delivered the first ever 15 Year National Infrastructure Plan.
New South Wales
Pacific Highway
Four lane divided road from near Newcastle to Queensland, with crashes reduced and travel times cut by up to 2.5 hours.
16,500 direct and indirect jobs.
Victoria
Murray Basin Rail
Upgrading over 1000 km of rail line to provide an alternative to road freight.
276 jobs.
Great Ocean Road
Strengthening bridges and upgrading pavement, guardrails, cliff and land slip sites.
Urban Congestion and Regional Roads Packages
A number of projects that will relieve congestion in urban areas.
Upgrading rural and regional road infrastructure in Victoria.
Princes Highway West
Duplication to help bring regional communities together and link key industries to markets.
Queensland
Bruce Highway
Upgrades to improve safety, congestion and flood immunity.
Reducing travel times for motorists and freight – including a range of safety packages and overtaking lane projects, the duplication of the Boundary Road interchange and the upgrade at Yellow Gin Creek south of Ayr.
Gateway Motorway North
Widening from 4 to 6 lanes, improving access and better connecting the Bruce Highway, Northern Brisbane and the Port of Brisbane.
1,000 jobs.
Toowoomba Range Crossing
Cutting travel times and removing traffic from Toowoomba Town Centre.
1,800 jobs.
Western Australia
North-link WA
A new 40km highway to improve freight and save travel times through the Swan Valley.
Perth Freight Link
Providing a direct, free-flowing connection to the Port of Fremantle.
2,400 jobs.
South Australia
North South Corridor and Northern Connector project
Better connecting Adelaide’s port, airport and freight terminals.
The construction of a new 15.5 kilometre road linking the Northern Expressway to the northern end of the South Road Superway.
1,330 jobs.
Tasmania
Midland Highway Upgrade
Upgrade between Hobart and Launceston, to improve safety and freight delivery.
234 jobs.
Northern Territory
Tiger Brennan Drive
Duplication to improve safety and congestion.
120 direct jobs; 30 for Indigenous Australians.
Northern Australia
Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility
Unlocking the economic potential of the North through $5 billion in concessional loans that will deliver major economic infrastructure.
Northern Australia Roads
Priority road projects in key strategic corridors in Northern Australia
plus targeted upgrades to key roads necessary for transporting cattle and improving cattle supply chains in Northern Australia.
National Water Infrastructure Loan Facility
The Coalition Government will make available $2 billion over 10 years for loans to the state and territory governments under a new National Water Infrastructure Loan Facility.
The loan facility will be available from 2016-17 to enhance the capital available for water infrastructure projects, stimulating and accelerating investments in water infrastructure in regional areas by the states.
This will include the construction of new dams, pipelines and managed aquifer recharge projects that are economically viable and will generate affordable water to grow regional economies.
Access to affordable water will be a key influence over the extent to which Australia’s farm and food sectors can realise export growth opportunities and meet growing demand from population growth.
This compliments the $500 million National Water Infrastructure Development Fund to plan for and build the water infrastructure, including new dams and pipelines, needed to secure growth in agricultural production and regional communities.
National Stronger Regions Programme
The $1 billion National Stronger Regions Fund is supporting 162 job creating infrastructure projects in regional and disadvantaged communities across Australia.
Connecting regions to the National Broadband Network
We have put the NBN back on track to deliver high-speed broadband to all Australian homes and businesses by 2020.
In September 2013, fewer than three percent of Australian premises could obtain a service on the NBN.
Today over two million homes and businesses can access the NBN and there are more than 900,000 active users.
By completion, every user will have broadband speeds 4 to 10 times faster than today’s average.
Our plan is the fastest and most affordable way to deliver better broadband to all Australians by 2020.
Under Labor, the NBN was the most poorly managed infrastructure project in Australia’s history.
Labor spent $6 billion in 4 years to connect just 51,000 users to the built network.
We are connecting more than 50,000 homes a month, compared to 51,000 in total under Labor.
The most recent nbn Corporate Plan estimates that reverting to Labor’s all-fibre plan would require peak funding of between $74 billion and $84 billion, and the rollout could not be completed until at least 2026 and possibly as late as 2028.
The Coalition’s nbn plan requires peak funding of approximately $49 billion and will be finished by 2020.
Fixing mobile black spots
Fixing mobile black spots In round one of the Mobile Black Spots Programme $100 million was provided to build or upgrade 499 mobile phone base stations which will improve the mobile phone coverage in 3000 mobile black spots.
An additional $60 million will see more mobile black spots fixed under round two of the programme.
WORLD CLASS HEALTHCARE
The Coalition Government is committed to providing Australians with world class health care.
Hospital Funding
The Government has provided an additional $2.9 billion in public hospital funding over the next three years (an increase of up to 6.5% a year) through an agreement with the states and territories that places greater focus on patient outcomes, particularly when it comes to caring for patients with chronic and complex needs.
Healthier Medicare
The Government is strengthening Medicare through the new Health Care Homes initiative, which will better coordinate comprehensive care for chronically ill patients.
GPs will be able to coordinate the medical, allied health and out-of-hospital services required by chronically ill patients on an ongoing basis to help manage their conditions, and in doing so keep them out of hospital.
From 1 July 2017, 65,000 Australians will initially participate in this program at up to 200 medical practices across Australia, ahead of a full national rollout.
Primary Health Networks
The Government has introduced a system of Primary Health Networks to identify local health needs, improve patient access to primary care services and improve co-ordination with local hospitals and community services.
The Government has established 31 Private Health Networks around Australia to improve access to local health services, by investing close to $1 billion.
Mental Health Reforms
The Coalition Government is delivering significant reforms that will put the individual needs of patients at the centre of our mental health system.

These reforms will reshape the delivery of primary mental health services towards a more modern, flexible model of care, rather than the current “one-size-fits-all” approach.
Cheaper Medicines
The Government is making medicines cheaper – in some cases by as much as 60% per script, saving patients with multiple chronic conditions as much as $500 per year.
Additional cost savings for many common medicines are due to come into effect in October 2016, as a result of changes to the way everyday drugs are priced.
New Medicines
The Government has put nearly 1,000 new and amended drug listings onto the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, ensuring these life-saving medicines are available to all Australians, including:
Keytruda, which is used to treat Melanoma;
Mekinist, which is used to treat positive Metastatic Melanoma;
and
Perjeta, Herceptin and Kadcyla, which are used to treat Breast Cancer.
The Government has also invested $1 billion to subsidise breakthrough treatments for all sufferers of Hepatitis C.
|These treatments would cost $100,000 per patient if not subsidised through the PBS.
Medical Research Future Fund
Australia is a world leader in the field of medical research.
The $20 billion Medical Research Future Fund is providing a sustainable source of funding for vital medical research over the long term.
No Jab No Pay
To protect children from diseases, our “No Jab, No Pay” rule is removing access to family and child care payments for parents who don’t vaccinate their children.
PUTTING STUDENTS FIRST
The Coalition Government is investing record levels in our schools with total Commonwealth funds reaching $73.6 billion over the next four years.
This is an increase of 26%. School funding will continue to increase each and every year going forward.
As part of this, the Government is providing an additional $1.2 billion between 2018 and 2020 for schools, contingent upon reform efforts by the States and the non-government schools sector to improve education outcomes.
The Coalition Government is focused not just on more money but on making sure money is invested where it can make the most difference to student results.
Through our Students First approach, we are working with states and territories to focus on the four key areas that make a real difference to student results:
Better teaching quality
More school autonomy
Engaging parents in education
Strengthening the curriculum.
For example, our teaching quality reforms are introducing a new national literacy and numeracy test to ensure all new teachers are in the top 30% for literacy and numeracy in Australia.
Our National Innovation and Science Agenda is leading the way in promoting learning in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM).
Supporting Apprentices
The Coalition Government is supporting apprentices through Trade Support Loans – helping apprentices with the costs of living, tools and training through loans of up to $20,000 each.
So far, over 40,000 loans have been taken up.
To help match the right apprentice to the right apprenticeship and lift completion rates, the Government has established the Australian Apprenticeship Support Network, supported by $200 million of annual funding.
This year the Government is supporting an estimated 68,000 employers with incentive payments to help businesses create opportunities for apprentices.
Fixing the VET FEE-HELP Scheme
To restore confidence in vocational education, the Coalition Government has taken over a dozen measures to crack down on dodgy providers, including strengthening the powers of the regulator and establishing a National Training Complaints Hotline for students.
Following consultation with the sector and the community, the Coalition will redesign the VET FEE-HELP scheme for 2017.
Support for Universities
Under the Coalition Government, funding for universities is at record levels, with funding of over $16 billion in 2016.
Support for students is also at a record level, with $6.8 billion invested in 2016 (a 65 per cent increase on 2009 levels).
Australia has one of the most generous student loan schemes in the world, under which no domestic student has to pay up-front fees.
The National Innovation and Science Agenda will drive stronger university collaboration with industry through an additional $127 million in targeted research funding and new research impact measures.
Simply put, we are connecting our academics with industry in order to build commercial capacity
and create jobs in Australia.
More Investment in Early Childhood Education
The Government is investing more than $3 billion in a new Jobs for Families child care package to make child care simpler, more affordable and more accessible for almost one million Australian families.
Families with incomes between $65,000 and $170,000 will be around $30 a week better off.
The Coalition Government is also ensuring all Australian children can receive 15 hours of preschool a week in the year before school (and exempting these 600 hours a year from the child care activity test).
Investing in Vocational Education and Training
The Coalition Government invests around $7 billion in the VET sector each year through funding and student loans.
This includes $1.8 billion to the states and territories to support their training systems, including TAFE.
TACKLING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
TACKLING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Women and children in Australia must be safe in their homes, safe on our streets and safe online.
Domestic and family violence is never acceptable.
The Coalition Government is taking action on domestic violence, with a $100 million Women’s Safety Package.
Immediate and practical action is focussed on three key areas:
Keeping women safe at home
Innovative technology is being trialled and used to keep women safe, including GPS trackers for perpetrators, safe phones and safety devices for homes.
We are expanding support to counselling services such as 1800RESPECT and Mensline.
Support and training for frontline services
Training is being expanded for frontline workers, including police, doctors, emergency department staff and social workers.
Domestic violence units are being established in legal services.
Breaking the cycle of violence
To address the negative behaviours and attitudes that can lead to violence, we are providing additional resources to help teachers, parents and students learn more about respectful relationships.
This Women’s Safety Package is in addition to the $30 million committed by all Australian governments to a national campaign to change young people’s attitudes to violence.
CARING FOR OUR ENVIRONMENT
The Coalition Government is committed to protecting Australia’s magnificent natural environment.
Protecting the Great Barrier Reef
Our Reef 2050 Long Term Sustainability Plan is the most comprehensive plan ever developed to protect the Great Barrier Reef for future generations.
The Coalition has put in place an historic ban on capital dredge disposal in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park – ending a 100 year old practice.
$2 billion is being invested by Australian governments on projects that include improving water quality, reducing sediment and nitrogen run off, removing crown of thorns starfish and improving our scientific knowledge of the reef.
Our work to protect the Great Barrier Reef resulted in the World Heritage Committee declaring last July that Australia was a global role model for the management of World Heritage properties.
Supporting renewable energy
The Coalition Government will double renewable energy in Australia over the next four years.
Under the Renewable Energy Target, more than 23% of Australia’s electricity will come from renewable energy by 2020.
We are supporting large scale projects, while at the same time making solar more affordable for households.
We are encouraging new technology to assist in the transition to clean energy, through the $1 billion Clean Energy Innovation Fund.
This Fund will target projects such as large-scale solar.
Tackling climate change
To protect our environment for future generations, we need to tackle climate change.
As a country, we are playing our part in the global challenge on climate change.
Australia has signed the Paris Climate Change Agreement.
We are on track to beat our 2020 target by 78 million tonnes, and have set an ambitious target of reductions of up to 28% by 2030 based on 2005 levels.
That is equivalent to reducing emissions per capita by up to 52%– the second largest reduction of any G20 economy.
We will meet our targets without Labor’s Carbon Tax, which made electricity more expensive for all Australian families.
We are investing $2.55 billion to incentivise business to reduce their emissions through our Emissions Reduction Fund.
Projects we’ve supported include carbon farming to increase carbon in the soil,
energy efficient lighting for town councils,
supporting re-vegetation and bushfire reduction.
We are also implementing a National Energy Productivity Plan, reducing emissions from ozone-depleting gases and supporting investments in new technology such as solar storage.
Supporting on-ground environmental projects
Right around Australia, young local people are delivering environmental projects in their communities through the Green Army.
We have already launched more than 500 teams across the country.
We are investing $1 billion in natural resource management through the National Landcare Programme.
The Coalition will continue to deliver on our $50 million commitment to plant 20 million trees by 2020, with almost 10 million trees already committed for planting over the next three years.
As well, we are greening our cities as part of the Coalition’s cities agenda.
Protecting our threatened species
Australia has some of the most unique flora and fauna on the planet and we’re protecting our native wildlife with the launch of Australia’s first Threatened Species Strategy and the appointment of Australia’s first Threatened Species Commissioner.
The Threatened Species Strategy targets the key threats to our wildlife, in particular feral cats.
Funding for projects to protect our threatened species has already topped $190 million.
Our National Environmental Science Program is supporting this work, with projects that deliver research projects in the field.
Protecting Australia’s heritage
The Coalition Government’s Australian Heritage Strategy sets out the action we are taking to support and promote our remarkable natural, historic and Indigenous heritage.
Protection of Australia’s national and world heritage is a fundamental pillar of the Government’s environment policy.
Our natural, Indigenous and historic heritage enhances our sense of place and national identity and makes a positive contribution to the nation’s wellbeing.
One stop shop
We have maintained environmental standards whilst reducing the red tape.
We have established a one stop shop for environmental assessments with every state and territory – cutting the double handling of assessments for projects.
OUR PLAN TO INVEST IN QUEENSLAND’S WATER INFRASTRUCTURE
Water infrastructure is essential to population growth, sustainable communities, jobs, productivity, and stronger economic outcomes.
Every community and industry requires water security to grow and prosper.
Many regional and remote communities depend on quality water infrastructure for their livelihood and jobs.
The Coalition has a strong record supporting investment in water infrastructure.
We are delivering more than half a billion dollars in grants to support the construction of nationally significant water infrastructure.
We are also providing $2 billion in concessional loans to fast-track the construction of water infrastructure throughout the country.
Our investment in water infrastructure is supporting jobs and regional communities.
We will do more to support jobs and growth through greater investment in Queensland’s water infrastructure.
The Coalition will invest $20 million to support the development or finalisation of feasibility assessments and business cases for 14 water infrastructure projects across Queensland.
These water infrastructure projects in Queensland include: development of a works programme for construction and upgrade of major water infrastructure for Clermont, as well as augmentation and remediation works on the Theresa Creek Dam
funding business case development for the construction of the Rookwood Weir
development of feasibility studies for new dams near Collinsville, Hell’s Gate, and Emu Swamp
raising the height of the Burdekin Falls Dam by approximately two metres
feasibility studies for new water storage and irrigation infrastructure options to help Isis Central Sugar Mill Company Limited cultivate 6,800 hectares for sugarcane in the Gayndah Region of the Burnett River catchment
investigating three dam storages on the upper and middle reaches of the Herbert River and the Millstream
assessment of additional water storage for Mount Isa and Cloncurry
assessment into the utilisation of South-East Queensland’s treated effluent for agricultural production
We will also fund half the cost of Rookwood Weir – up to $130 million – if the business case meets all the necessary requirements and it acquires the required environmental approval.
Read more about our plan to invest in Queensland’s Water Infrastructure
Investing in Queensland’s Water Infrastructure
Water infrastructure is essential to population growth, sustainable communities, jobs, productivity, and stronger economic outcomes.
The Coalition has a strong record supporting investment in water infrastructure.
We are delivering more than half a billion dollars in grants to support the construction of nationally significant water infrastructure.
We are also providing $2 billion in concessional loans to fast-track the construction of water infrastructure throughout the country.
