The founding letter of the Political Movement COEXISTENCE
The founding letter of the Political Movement COEXISTENCE
Name of the political movement Együttélés - Spolužitie - Wspólnota - Souižtí
The movement wishes to enforce the rights of national minorities in the spirit of the International Agreement on Civil and Political Rights of the Final Document of the European Conference on Security and Co-operation, as well as, the Final Resolution of the consequent Vienna Meeting supervising its fulfilment, and in the spirit of the Resolution of lnternational Federation for Human Rights (FIDA) pas d on its Prague session on January 1990.
The movement will be working for democracy
for a constitutional state
and for the adoption of common European values.
It will stand up
for the national minorities's rights,
their collective political representation
for their right to make decision in their affairs,
for their civil equality
and equality of their rights
for the opportunity of equal chances
as well as, against the different forms of discrimination.
It will fight against
nationalism, chauvinism, anti-semitism and xenophobia,
as well as any racial, religious and of conviction arising discrimination.
It desires to protect
the natural environment,
the cultural and spiritual treasures of national minorities,
their economic, regional developmental, respectively social and ecological interests,
which may be the foundation of the mental, spiritual, material and moral condition necessary for the maintenance of their national self-identity, u on which they may build up again, in spite of the many decades lasting distructive influence,
and extricating themselves, their society based on self-administration and self-gevernment.
The basic conditions to achieve this objective are the mutual tolerance of the citizens of different nationalities, mainly the agreeable co-existence of the Hungarian, German, Ruthenian/Ukrainian, Polish, Jewish with the Czech and the Slovak Nation.
The movement supports
every identity-aspiration of the ethnic groups of Romanies (Gipsies) acknowledging all of their legal, ethnic specific efforts, and on the basis of legal human standards and on the principle of equity is ready to help them, as far as possible.
The principles of democracy
will be coming across inadequately in the Czecho-Slovak political practice, as long as, the "nation-state" attitude will haunt, until the notion of state becomes superior to that of the citizen,
as long as the minority will be at the mercy of the majority's will.
The movement wishes to build up its activity based on several main pillars of the recited principles:
1. The Political representation
is concievable only in a pluralistic, democratic system by way of the national minorities having a special representation in the legislative assemblies, and having the right to decide the affairs concerning minorities.
The principal of the majority which. is the basis of every democracy should be counterbalanced by protecting the national minorities against the possibility of being voted down, especially in the spheres of public education, culture and mass media.
2. Economic life.
The basis of the good public sentiment is the general financial security and well-being, which is possible only under the circumstances of the sustainable social- and market-based economy.
Its basic condition is the privatization,
the propagation of private enterpreneurship
and having a working local self-government.
One of its most important sphere in our circumstance is the transformation of co-operative farms into real co-operations, share-companies etc.,
as well as the restitution of private land ownership.
3. Social politics.
Its main objective is the protection of families resting on the protection of employees,
the safeguarding of equal chances,
the securing of settlement structures,
the creation of local job opportunities etc.
One of the objectives of the social politics is to refund through transfer payments those ill-proportioned taxes by which the territories inhabited by national minorities have been impoverished for decades.
4 Protection of vital conditions and the natural environment.
Feeling please, in addition to the financial security and well-being, has other conditions, too.
Disharmony in nature, as well as disorder in human scale of values may lead to the deprivation of life's quality.
To avoid, respectively to reduce this danger, we will take the initiative to protect the living and the lifeless nature,
and will protect the monuments, settlements and cultural values created by people.
For the national minorities it means first of all the complex protection of their region.
5. Public education should be self-administrative.
The school system of national minorities should be rebuilt by re-establishement of elementary schools whereever necessary.
The basic and unalienated right of any national minority is to learn and study on its mother tongue from the elementary to superior level.
6. Let the organization of culture be
- similarly to public education - self-administrative.
Let the national minorities decide themselves what institutions they need.
The national minorities should have share from the government's cultural budget according to their numerical proportion.
No law or financial decree should hinder the contacts and communication of national minorities with the rest of their nation living beyond the frontiers, or with the mother country and groups of identical culture, since the nation is culturally universal.
7. Use of language.
The law should safeguard that the national minorities may use freely their mother tongue in official contacts in written and in spoken form throughout the administrative areas inhabited by them (villa es, towns, counties etc.).
All signs and official prints or forms should be bi- or multilingual.
Religious life.
The most fundamental right of a man is to practice his religion freely and on his mother tongue.
Our movement will organically suppport this request of the faithful.
We support the re-establishement of the scout movement in the interest of religious and moral upbringing based on the three-fold unity of God - Homeland - Fellow-man.
9. The basis of the coexistence of people of different nationalities
is the tolerance, forgiving, mutual respect, the knowledge of each other's cult re and language.
Normalized coexistence is unthinkable without equality of rights, of rank,
and without laws.
The political and social standards of coexistence should be formed by common interests connected to common domicile.
Let the basic cell of practicing the coexistence be the community-autonomy.
